5 














n4. — 


RET 











Hec by the Internet Archive 
in 2015 


https://archive.org/details/b21969012 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM, 
WITH 


THE ENGLISHMAN'S DOCTER, 


AN ANCIENT TRANSLATION. 


HOC OPUS OPTATUR QUOD FLOS MEDICINE VOCATUR. 


ARNALDI COMMENT. 


























i E ERE S 
i4 Sow RATS 
ES NUM 
I M 


À 
M 








VAlla IN OVa. comm enting oxi ilre. e Ih o Lac ooo gere ^ 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM 
A POEM 


ON THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH 
IN RHYMING LATIN VERSE. 


ADDRESSED BY THE SCHOOL OF SALERNO TO ROBERT OF 
NORMANDY, SON OP WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR, 
WITH AN ANCIENT TRANSLATION : AND AN 
INTRODUCTION AND NOTES BY 


SIR ALEXANDER CROKE, D. C. L. AND F.A.S. 






































T as i ara $ 
"ue pode fis 


TALBOYS AND BROWNE PRINTERS, OXFORD. 





PREFACE. 


P 


AnovE one hundred and sixty editions of the 
Schola Salernitana are proofs of its merit and popu- 
larity, and some stray verses from it are frequently 
quoted. But since all the editions are now become 
scarce, and few persons seem acquainted with the 
poem at large, it was thought that a new edition 
might not be unacceptable to the curious and literary 
world. 'lhe introduction and notes, it is hoped, 
will be found to comprehend whatever is known 
relating to the poem, or which may be useful for its 
elucidation. 

Annexed is a scarce old English translation, 
which renders correctly the whole work, and may 
convey to the general reader a good idea of the 
original. 

The etchings are taken from the old wooden cuts 
in the German editions of Curio, printed in 1559, 
1568, and 1573. 

b 


v1 PREFACE. 


In the Essay on Rhyming Latin Verse, which was 
originally designed as part of the introduction to this 
work, amongst the modern ludicrous poems, I acci- 
dentally omitted an old acquaintance, Drunken Bar- 
naby's Four Journeys to the North of England. In 
the original edition, which has no date, it is entitled 
Barnabee Itinerarium. 'T'here have been many sub- 
sequent editions, and the last by Robert ITaslewood 
in 1820, of which only a few copies were printed, is 
a fac simile of the editio princeps. "The author was 
Richard Braithwait, M. A. It is unnecessary to 
make extracts from a poem so well known. I shall, 
however, quote one verse, which has afforded a sub- 
ject to an ingenious painter ?. 


In progressu Boreali, 
Ut processi ab Australi, 
Veni Banbury, O profanum! 
Ubi vidi Puritanum, 
Felem facientem furem, 
Quia sabbato stravit Murem. 


In my progress travelling Northward 
Taking farewell of the Southward, . 
To Banbury came I, O prophane one! 
Where I saw a Puritane-one 
Hanging of his cat on Monday, 
For killing of a mouse on Sunday. 


* E. Prentice, engraved by Meyer. 





PREFACE. vii 


Ít should have been observed, that two lines of 
Bernhardus Mortacensis?, are from Q. Cicero, who 
says, 


Femina nulla bona est, vel si bona contigit ulla, 
Nescio quo fato res mala facta bona est*. 


I must take this opportunity likewise to return 
my best thanks to Mr. Archdeacon Wrangham for a 
copy of his Psvcug, which was printed only for pri- 
vate distribution. This is an elegant translation 
into Latin rhyme of Mr. Bayly's Songs on Butter- 
flies, and other poems, and which has served as a 
classical recreation from the severer studies of the 
learned editor of Walton's Prolegomena. I have not 
room here for a long extract, but I cannot refrain 
from inserting the first stanza of the first song. 


Ah! sim Papilio natus in flosculo, 
Rose ubi liliaque et violz halent ; 
Floribus advolans, avolans, osculo 
Gemmulas tangens, que suave olent! 
Sceptra et opes ego neutiquam postulo, 
Nolo ego ad pedes qui se volutent :— 
Ah! sim Papilio natus in flosculo, 
Osculans gemmas qu:e suave olent! 


b Essay, p. 59. 
* See Ruperti Juvenal. vol. ii. p. 607, note 97. 


vil PREFACE. 


Since writing the account of the modes of versifi- 
cation usual amongst the rhyming Latin poets?, I 
have met with an ancient treatise upon metre, writ- 
ten about the end of the fifteenth century, or proba- 
 bly earlier, in which are laid down the rules observed 
by the writers of the middle ages in their Leonine 
verses. lt is unnecessary to state particularly the 
contents of the first part, since it relates to metre in 
general: the second is entitled Co£ores Metrorum 
Variati, that is, the various rhymes of verse, and 
contains a great number of curious examples. They 
are placed promiscuously but may be arranged in the 
following order, which I before adopted. '"lhey have - 
each their appropriate names *. 

The hexameter and pentameter metres were the 
most frequent. "The Leonine poets observed, that 
from the different ways in which the feet might be 
legitimately varied, the heroic or hexameter verse af- 


4 Essay on Rhyming Latin Verse, p. 17. 

* Published by James Nasmith, M. A. at Cambridge, 1778, 
at the end of two other works. Itineraria Symonis Simionis, et 
Willelmi de Worcestre. Quibus accedit Tractatus de metro, 
in quo traduntur regule à scriptoribus medii xvi in versibus 
Leoninis observatz, exeunto seculo xv. ut videtur scriptus. In- 
certi autoris, e cod, manus. in Bibl. Col. Corp. Christ. Cant. N^. 
386. Ihave collated it with the original, and. corrected some 
errors by it. Some parts seem much corrupted. 


PREFACE. IX 


forded thirty-two forms; the pentameter, four only. 
Of these varieties they availed themselves in con- 
structing their verses. 

Antes source of variety was derived fom the 
situation of the rhymes, either as they were placed, 
Dt. at the exd of the lines only: or likewise in the 
middle, as the line was divided: IIdYy, into tmo: 
IIIdly, into ZAree, or, IVthly, into more rhyming parts: 
or, Vtily, from other modes of versification. 

I. The first kind produced the couplet only, and 
such verses were called caudati. As in a hymn to 
saint Catherine: 


Coli gemma bona, succurre reis, Katerina, 
Et prece mellifluà sis :grotis medicina. 


II. When the line was divided into two rhyming 
parts, the middle rhyme naturally fell upon the 
pause, which is properly at the syllable following the 
first two feet. "These were called simplices Leonini. 


hegalis nata,—fueras dignas, venerata, 
In spe robusta—complectens dogmata justa. 


Sometimes it fell upon a syllable short of the 
pause. Citogradi. 


Filia regis,—supra coeli sidera degis, 
Pauperis egis—prebe nobis dogmata legis. 


b 3 


Xx PREFACE. 


or the syllable beyond the pause. — Saltantes. 


Rumpitur ipsa ferarum—machina facta rotarum, 
Deprimit agmen amarum—nobile fragmen earum. 


The rhymes of a line in two parts were either li- 
mited to one line, or extended through two, which 
resolved the stanza into four short lines, giving room 
for many varieties. | 

l. The middles and ends rhymed alternately. /z- 
terlaqueati. 


Plausus Grecorum,—1lux ccecis et via claudis, 
Incola cclorum—-virgo dignissima laudis. 


2. The first and fourth, the second and third. 
Cruciferi or Serpentin. 


Cesareos cultus—in spe ratà mens tua sprevit, 
Dum Caesar sevit—mansit stabilis tibi vultus. 


9. All four parts rhymed. | Duplices Leonini. 


Artibus nitenta—tibi floruit alma juventa, 
Jungis non lenta-—spontanea, non violenta. 


or lacer? dactylici. 


Hic ululatus incitur—ibique dolor reperitur, 
Iste tremore feritur—et ille furore potitur, 


PREFACE. xl 


III. When the line was divided into three parts, 
more varieties were produced. 

As to the form of the verse, each part consisted of 

l. Two dactyls, except the last spondee.  7'itu- 
bantes. 


O fera tormina—fit tua machina— bis rota bina, 
Sed tibi gratia— celica preemia—stat medicina. 


2. Of two spondees.  Lentogradi. 


Congaudentes—laudent gentes—munera Christi. 
Tu peccata—nobis nata—Christe, ademisti 


3. Of one dactyl, and one spondee. | Claudicantes 
Adonici. 


Cesar agonis—non rationis—vota gerebat, 
Dum sibi servos—ire protervos—precipiebat. 


4. Of a spondee and a dactyl, the reverse of the 
Adonic.  Declinatorüi. 


Hic crus tangitur—hic os frangitur—ecce repente 
Hic pes l:ditur—hic dens vellitur—ore patente. 


In the application of the rhyme. 
l. The beginning and middle rhymed, the ends 
of the two lines, as in the preceding examples, and 


Xil PREFACE. 


O miseratrix—O dominatrix—precipe dictu, 
Ne devastemur—ne lapidemur— grandinis ictu f. 


2. The rhymes of the beginning and middle of 
one line were continued in the second. 


Virgo beata—salusque parata—benigna precanti, 
Dona rogata—dabis cumulata—tibi fabulanti 8. 


3. The beginning, middle, and end of one line 
corresponded with the same parts of the second line. 


Cellula mellis—fundis ardorem— virgo serena, 
Nescia fellis—cui dat honorem—nostra camena". 


4. All the parts rhymed. — 4donici alterné relati. 


Theca pudoris,—virgo decoris—gemma valoris, 
Omnibus horis—es decus oris— stella nitoris. 


Adonici actu et casu intrinsicé clausulati. 


Dirige fatum—funde precatum—tolle reatum, 
Erige stratum—terge ingratum—pende ducatum. 


IV. Other varieties had more than three rhymes 
in each line. 

l. Four rhymes. | Hexametri extrinsicé retro- 
gradi varié colorati. Sometimes alternate. 


f From Everhardus. € Idem. h Idem. 


PREFACE. xiii 


Presto—mihi mesto—vicus gesto—precor esto 
Vana—retro suade—me vi sana—tibi trade. 
Retro— feda dato—me tetro—purificato, 
Sacris—vota dabo—me macris—assimulabo. 


2. Every word in a line rhymed, and the two ends, 
as in a couplet.  7'ripudiantes. | 


Se reserant—properant—lacerant—macerant—Kaateri- 
nam. 
Concupiunt—capiunt—Trapiunt—cupiuntque ruinam. 


J. Every word in one line rhymed with the cor- 
responding words of the other. | RAgyihmici retro- 
gradi singulis relati. 


Doctorum—documen—diversorum—superasti, 
Multorum—nocumen—tormentorum-—tolerasti. 


I thought they could go no farther, but there ap- 
pears to have been another advance, for all the words 
of both lines in the following verses rhyme together, 
and they are called undique relati. 


Plura precatura pura, cura valitura, 
Cura mansura, procura jura futura, 


V. "There were other ingenious fancies in versifi- 
cation. 

l. In the versus immediati the rhymes adjoined 
each other. j 


xiv PREFACE. 


S1 fugis obscenas—paenas—ternas baratorum 
Quorum—pressure—dure—£fuerunt mihi cure. 


2. In a variety of these, the versus immediati de- 
cessi, the end of one rhyming word formed another 
word which rhymed of course with it. 


Rumpas bellorum lorum, vim confert amorum 
Morum verorum, rorum tu plena polorum. 


9. In the repetorii every final syllable was the be- 
einning of the next word. 


Pravi vitentur turbamen mente tenentes. 
Jure retractentur turgescere repetentes. 


4. Versus capitati had the beginning of the first 
line at the end of the second, by the figure epana- 
lepsis. 


Fac Katerina pia, precibus pia corda juvari, 
Foedos purgari fac Katerina pia. 


In this measure is a hymn of Colius Sedulius of 
110 lines, one couplet is thus: 


Sola fuit mulier patuit quà Janua leto: 
Ex quà vita redit so/a fuit mulier. 


9. The retrogradi reciproci repeated the first 
words of a line at the end of it, with other repetitions 
and transpositions. 





PREFACE. Xv 


Rectificare rea scis, vis rea rectificare, 
Pacificare fera vis, scis fera pacificare. 


6. In the Leonin? prosaici the rhyme was con- 
cealed in the middle of a word. 


Amoveas feritates, donans vivere vitales, 
Nos solitari fac pro colebe vita. 


7. In the exírinsicó clausulati singula. singulis, 
the words of the first line referred to the correspond- 
| ing words of the second. 


Consolare, preme, refove, convertere, deme, 
Tristes, bellantes, flentes, reprobos, cruciantes. 


| with continued rhymes— 


Egere, fugere—consere desere—qusre medere 
Funera munera— prospera propera—vera severa. 


| 8. The words were in pairs, versus bino verbo 
| clausulati. 


Lugeo, soleris: peto, des: premor, auxiliaris : 
Cedor, vivifices: cado, stes: inimicor, amicis. 


9. The first word of an hexameter rhymed with 
| the last of a pentameter. JHexametri adjuncti pen- 
| tametris extrinsicé retrogradi. 


Xvi PREFACE. 
Delicias tibi scis varias scis tradere dias. 


Postulo te venias, das retio sevitias. 
10. Pentametri rithmicé retrogradi et interlaqueati. 
Colum fac recoli condita vota deo, 
Colum sterne doli perdita redde reo. 


ll. Retrograde verses, the same backwards and 
forwards : 


Ecce tenet sedes sanas, sedes tenet ecce 


Abba suus summus, summus suus Abba. 
Odo tenet mulum, madidam mappam tenet Anna. 


In the Anthologia are some poems of this kind, 
entitled Kapkivo, ezixoi, or crab verses). As 
UPON THE TOMB OF DIOMEDES: 
"Hón pot Atóc dpa 7]y)) rapà coi, Awvpf]óg. 
Nocó c) 0c 1) tapa, Igcóv, cócov.— 
Xojóc £yeys 10m Ov dvo, xapà rOv dvo, ycXÀ và 
Karo* Aéyov àv, 0 rapaxóv ávo, 1j05 &ycys cogóc, 
19. Retrogradi tam sententiá quem metro. 
Te fore lunaticam dico non, nomino puram: 


Nomino tricam non, cclicolam voco te. 


i Ed. de Bosch. lib. vi. tit. 3. vol. iii. p. 126. 





THE CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I. HISTORY OF THE SCHOOL OF SALERNO. 


Lombazrd princes of Salerno, Norman princes, page 3. Early 
fame for medical science, p. 4. Mount Casino, p. 5. Con- 
stantine the African, p. 11. His scholars and successors, p. 12. 
Female professors of Medicine, p. 13. Salerno created an Uni- 
versity, p. 14. Medical knowledge of the Arabians, p. 17. 


II. OF ROBERT DUKE OF NORMANDY. 


Arrival of Robert of Normandy at Salerno, p. 19. He goes 
to Palestine, and returns to Salerno. His marriage with Sy- 
billa de Conversano, p. 21. His wound and stay there, p. 22. 


III. HISTORY OF THE SCHOLA SALERNITANA. 


The Schola Salerni written and addressed to him, not to 
Charlemagne or Edward the Confessor, p. 28. Of John de 
Milano, p. 26. 


IV. SUBJECT OF THE SCHOLA SALERNITANA. 


The precepts, whence derived, p. 28. Object and contents. 
Style and versification, p. 29. 


xvlii CON'TENTS. 


V. COMMENTATORS AND PRINCIPAL PRINTED 
EDITIONS. 


General view of the commentators and principal printed 
editions. Arnaldus de Villa Nova, p. 33. . Curio and Crellius, 
p. 37. Moreau, ib. Zacharius Sylvius, p. 38. Text altered 
by Lombard, p. 39, by Bruytsma, p. 40. 


VI. THE MANUSCRIPTS. 


General view of the state of the manuscripts, and of the text 
adopted in this edition, p. 41. 
VII. IMITATIONS. 


Universities of Paris and Montpelier. Benedict de Nursià. 
Thaddeus de Florentià. Magninus. Ancient medical poems. 
Eobanus Hesse. Baptista Frire. Account of /Egidius Corboli- 
ensis, and his poem on the virtues of compound Medicines, 
p. 92. 


CATALOGUE OF PRINTED EDITIONS, p. 67. 


CATALOGUE OF MANUSCARBIPTS, p. 94. 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM, p. 101. 


THE ENGLISHMAN'S DOCTER, OR THE SCHOOLE 
OF SALERNE, p. 119. 


CONTENTS. XlX 


ADDITIONS FROM VARIOUS MSS. p. 149. 


A SPECIMEN OF VILLA NOVA'S ORIGINAL 
EXPOSITION, p. 170. 


NOTES TO THE REGIMEN SANITATIS, p. 173. 
NOTES TO THE ADDITIONS, p. 187. 


INDEX TO THE REGIMEN SANITATIS, p. 193. 





INTRODUCTION. 


I. HISTORY OF THE SCHOOL OF SALERNO. 


Tu city of Salerno, the earliest school in Christian 
Europe where medicine was professed, taught, and 
practised, enjoyed every advantage which could be 
derived from a delicious climate, a spacious harbour, 
a river, and a fertile and variegated country. Yet 
ZEgidius Corboliensis, a writer of the twelfth century, 
informs us, that even at that time the air was bad, 
and afforded exercise to the skill of the physicians. 
Originally a Roman colony, it experienced the va- 
rious fortunes of the western empire. Upon the 
extinction of the dominion of the Goths, it be- 
came subject to the eastern empire, was soon after 
conquered by the Lombards, and, in their political 
arrangements, it formed part of the dutchy of Bene- 
vento. When Charlemagne destroyed the Lombard 
kingdom of Italy, the dukes of Benevento, who had 
B 


9 INTRODUCTION. 


assumed the title of prince, formed a barrier against 
his farther progress towards the south of Italy, and 
preserved their independence, and their dominions. 
The subordinate cities and districts within their ter- 
ritories were governed by counts and castaldi, of 
whom the counts of Salerno were amongst the 
principal!. | 

In the contentions of the Lombard princes, about 
the middle of the ninth century, the province of 
Benevento was divided into three sovereignties; the 
principalities of Benevento and Salerno, and sub- 
sequently the county of Capua. Salerno was the 
largest, and comprehended all the southern parts of 
Italy, and the metropolis was a great and well forti- 
fied city, the seat of the prince, and of an arch- 
bishop ?. 

In the meanwhile these districts were in an un- 
settled and unhappy state. All the coasts of Italy 
were frequently plundered and devastated by the 
neighbouring Arabians of Sicily, Africa, and Spain ; 
and they occasionally occupied parts of the country. 


! Giannone, Istoria di Napoli, ed. Hoaia. 1753, vol. i. 
p. 387. 481, etc. Antoni Mazza, Urbis Salernitanz Historia 
et Antiquitates. In Graevii et Gronovii Antiquitates Ttal. 
tom. 1x. part 1v. 

. ? Gian. vol. i. p. 431. 


INTRODUCTION. 9 


To these miseries were added the attempts of the 
emperors of the east to recover their Italian do- 
minions. "Phe dissensions and contests of the Lom- 
bard princes themselves were unceasing, and the 
destructive practice of dividing their dominions 
amongst their sons had portioned out the country 
into a vast number of independent states ?. 

A country so distracted and weakened was an 
easy conquest to the Normans. "The sons of Tancred 
of Hauteville arrived in 1035, and were received 
with kindness by Guimar the fourth, the prince of 
Salerno. As the allies of the Lombards, they at first 
attacked only the Greeks and the Arabians. Robert 
Guiscard, to establish his power by an alliance with 
the Lombard princes, having divorced his first wife 
Alverada, married Sicelgaita, the sister of Gisulf the 
second, who had succeeded his father Guimar. A 
quarrel, followed by a war, ensued between the 
brothers-in-law. ^ Kobert besieged Salerno, took the 
city, made Gisulf a prisoner, and possessed himself 
of the principality, which was thus united to the 
dukedom of Apulia in 1075. By this and other 
acquisitions, the Norman power at length extended 
over the whole of what now constitutes the kingdom 
of Naples and Sicily. Robert Guiscard was suc- 


3 Gian. vol. i. p. 444. 


4 INTRODUCTION. 


ceeded in 1085, by his son Ruggiero, with the title 
of duke of Apulia and Sicily *. 

From its connection with Constantinople and the 
Saracens, Salerno became the centre of the united 
learning of the Latins, the Greeks, and the Arabians: 
and hence it was one of the first cities in Europe 
where the sciences awoke from the slumber of bar- 
barism.  Amongst other arts, it was celebrated very 
early for the profession of medicine*. But as nothing 
in those dark ages could be accomplished without a 
miracle, the first fame of Salerno was derived from 
the extraordinary cures said to have been performed 
by the relies of saint Archelais. "This lady, with 
two other holy virgins, Thecla and Susanna, suffered 
martyrdom in the persecution of Diocletian, about 
the year 295, and their remains were deposited at 
length in the church of the DBenedictine nuns of 
saint George at Salerno. 

In an ancient Chronicle, quoted by Mazza, it is 
said, that the first founders of the school of Salerno 
were Rabinus Elinus a Jew, Pontus, a Greek, Adala, 


* Gian. vol. ii. p. 67. 74, etc. 

5 [n urbe Psalernitanà, ubi maxime medicorem schole ab 
antiquo tempore habentur.  Orderic. Vitalis ad an. 1059. 
Sin dà tempi di papa Giovanni VIII. (pope from 872 to 882.) 
Gian. vol. ii. p. 124. 

9 Anton. Mazza, Salern. Hist. cap. vi. 


INTRODUCTION. : 5 


a Saracen, and Salernus a Latin: who taught medi- 
cine in their respective languages, but at what era 
is not mentioned 7. 

"Though medical works had never been wanting in 
the dark ages, and the works of Hippocrates and 
Galen were translated into Latin as early as the 
sixth century?, yet this art was principally derived 
from the. Arabians, who likewise learned it from the 
Greeks. After that warlike people had softened 
into habits of peace and luxury, by the encourage- 
ment of their khalifs, and particularly of Almamon, 
at the beginning of the ninth century, they applied 
themselves to learning. Many of the Greek writers 
were translated into Arabic, and the philosophy of 
Aristotle, and the art of medicine of Hippocrates 
and Galen became their favourite studies. In their 
frequent visits to the port of Salerno, the knowledge 
which they freely communicated was eagerly received 
there, and diligently cultivated. For many centuries 
the most able professors of medicine were the higher 
prelates, and the superior monks ?. 


? Anton. Mazza, Salern. Hist. cap. ix. 

8 About the year 560 Cassiodorius recommended to his monks, 
Legite Hippocratem et Galenum Latinà linguà conversos. Mu- 
ratori Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. eol. 930. 

? Subsequently, by the councils of Lateran in 1139, of Tours 
in 1163, and the decree of Honorius III. in 1216, the clergy 


B3 


6 INTRODUCTION. 


Connected with the city of Salerno by its vicinity, 
and the similarity of their literary pursuits, was the 
monastery of mount Casino. This celebrated abbey 
was founded by saint Benedict himself, in 528, upon 
a high and rocky mountain, on the site of a temple 
of Apollo. Here he wrote the rules of his order, 
and, having presided as abbot for twenty years, there 
died and was buried !?. Of all this he informed the 
poet Dante, when he met with him in Paradise, 
and lamented the subsequent depravity of his 
monks— 


Quel monte, a cui Cassino e nella costa, 
Fu frequentato già in su la cima 
Dalla gente ingannata, e mal disposta : 

Ed 1o son quel, che su vi portai prima 
Lo nome di colui, che "n terra addusse 
La verità, che tanto ci sublima: 

E tanta grazia sovra me rilusse, 

Ch" io ritrassi le ville circonstanti 
Dall' empio colto, che '1 mondo sedusse. 

Questi altri fuochi tutti contemplanti 

Uomini furo accesi di quel caldo, 


and monks were prohibited from exercising the professions of 
advocates and physicians, but they still continued the practice. 

1? Mabillon, Annales ordinis S. Benedicti, vol. i. p. 55, 
etc, 


INTRODUCTION. T 


Che fa nascere i fiori e i frutti santi 

Qui e Maccario, qui € Romoaldo: 
Qui son li frati miei, che dentro à chiostri 
Fermar li piedi, e tennero "| cor saldo !. 


This monastery partook of the vicissitudes of the 
south of Italy: Sixty years after its foundation it 
was totally destroyed by Zoto, the Lombard duke of 
Benevento; the abbot and monks fled to Rome, and 
were permitted by Pelagius the second to build a 
monastery near the Lateran. After an absence of 
one hundred and thirty years, their original habita- 
tion was rebuilt in its primitive splendour??. It 
was afterwards frequently plundered by the Lom- 
bard princes, and the Saracens!. In 8984 it was 
burned by the Saracens, and saint Bertharius the 
abbot was slain. The monks escaped to Teano, and 
from thence to Capua, where they resided for sixty 
years, when they returned to Casino!*. Nor were 
they more secure under the Normans. In 1045, 
under Rodolf, they attempted to get possession .of 
the place, but were defeated by the monks !5. 


!! Dante, Pardiso, canto xxii. stanza 37. 

?? Mabillon, vol. i. Gian. vol. i. p. 254. 

15 [bid. vol. i1. p. 645. 670. ; vol. v. p. 170. etc. 

14 [bid. vol. iii. p. 250, 481. Chron. Cass. de vita Abbatis 
Desiderii, p. 413. 

15 [bid. vol. iv. p. 469. 


8 INTRODUCTION. 


Notwithstanding these misfortunes, the monastery 
increased in riches, power, and dignity. It was 
considered as the head and origin of the Benedictine 
order!6, By the benefactions of princes its revenues 
were enormous, and the buildings magnificent. A 
new church was consecrated by Alexander the 
second attended by all the princes of Italy. It 
was invested with extraordinary privileges, was 
exempted from episcopal jurisdiction, and was sub- 
ject only to the pope. The monks elected their 
own abbot, who was consecrated by the pope in 
person, and enjoyed the precedence over all other 
abbots.—Excommunication de,facto was the penalty 
for any invasion of their possessions. "This abbey 
gave popes, cardinals, and bishops to Iioly church, 
and when it was thought meritorious to desert the 
active duties of life for the indolence of the cloister, 
several princes retired to it, as Carloman elder bro- 
ther of Pepin, Ratchis king of the Lombards, his 
wife "asia, and her daughter Ratrudis ". 

However the institution of the Benedictine order 


16 "Totius fons religionis et origo. Mab. vol. iu. p. 223. 

" Grev. vol. x. part. i. p. 214. Murat. Script. Ital. vol. iv, 
p. 174. Mabil. vol. v. p. 34. ; vol. ii. p. 115.; vol. iv. p. 420. 
745.; vol. v. 170. | Gian. vol. ii. p. 71. ; vol. i. p. 368.; vol. ii, 
p. 70. 131. 147. In 747 and 750. 


INTRODUCTION. 9 


might afterwards degenerate, it. was founded upon 
rational and enlightened principles. Besides their 
religious duties, the monks were enjoined to apply 
themselves to science and general literature, and to 
engage the services of the most learned men by 
liberal salaries 9. These injunctions were executed 
with diligence and spirit. In the eleventh century 
this monastery took the lead in the progress of 
learning. "The philosophy of Aristotle, the scholastic 
theology, profane and sacred learning were culti- 
vated; and treatises upon music, logic, astronomy, 
and other sciences, were written by the monks. 
Many of the classics, as Tacitus, Homer, Cicero de 
Natura Deorum, Terence, Horace, the Fasti of 
Ovid, Seneca, Virgil, and "Theocritus, Josephus, 
Jornandes, and Gregory of Tours, were transcribed 
by order of the abbot Desiderius??, and the service 
of the church was performed both in Greek and 


18 Jubebantur ut literarum studiis operam darent, et in omni- 
bus praeclaris disciplinis, ad statum monasticum pertinentibus, 
amplissimà mercede conductis ad hoc doctissimis et przstantis- 
simis quibuscumque viris, suas omnes erudiri et nobilitare stu- 
derent. Ugonius, De dignitate ac prestantià reipublieze Casi- 
nensis, in Graev. et Burman. Thesaur. vol. ix. pars i. p. 
323. a. b. 

1I? Giannone, lib. x. cap. ii. sect. 2.; vol. ii. p. 112. 118, from 
the Chron. Cass. lib, iii. cap. lxiii. p. 473. 


10 INTRODUCTION. 


Latin?*, "They were equally familar with the 
writings of the Arabians, and the art of medicine 
engaged their particular attention?l. "The Chronicon 
Casinense ?, written by Leo, cardinal bishop of 
Ostia, in the eleventh century, and Peter Diaconus, 
both monks of Casino, have given us catalogues of 
eminent men who flourished here. Of these, the 
abbot Bertharius was of the royal family of France, 
and was murdered by the Saracens, and amongst. 
other learned works, wrote two books upon medi- 
cine. JAlfanus the second, elected abbot in 1057, 
was a philosopher, a musician, a theologian, an 
orator, and a poet, wrote medical books upon the 
union of the soul and body, and upon the four hu- 
mours. Another abbot, Desiderius, afterwards pope 
Victor the third in 1085, was a learned man and a 
skilful physician, and furnished the library of the 


?) Mabil. vol. ii. p. 55. Muratori. Seript. Ital. vol. iv. p. 
309. 

?! Peter Diaconus. 

?? Chronicon S. Monasteri Casinensis, auctore Leone, car- 
dinali episcopo Ostiensi, continuatore Petro Diacono, ejusdem 
coenobii monachis. Leo comprehends from the foundation to 
1087. Peter Diaconus from thence to 1138. He died in 1140. 
There 1s another work of Peter, De viris illustribus Casinen- 
sibus, with Mari's notes.  Grav. et Burman. ibid. p. 329. 





INTRODUCTION. 1l 


monastery with many books?.  Amongst these were 
the Institute and Novels of Justinian, the Pandects 
not having yet been discovered at Amalfi?*. 

Such progress had the sciences made at Salerno, 
and in the monastery of mount Casino, when the 
arrival of Constantine the African* commenced a 
new era of learning and fame. "This celebrated 
man was born at Carthage. After thirty-nine years 
spent in study at Bagdad, and in travel, he returned 
to his native country master of all the learning then 
current in the world, and particularly of medicine. 
His talents excited the jealousy of his rivals, he was 
obliged to fly, and took refuge at Salerno in 1000. 
He was discovered by the brother of the khahf of 
Babylon in Egypt, who happened to be in that city, 
and who recommended him to Robert Guiscard. 
By this prince he was patronised, and made his 
secretary. Llaving been converted to Christianity he 
became a monk, and retired to the monastery of 
mount Casino, about the year 1075, when Desiderius 
was the abbot. He died in 1087; by his wonderful 
cures, the multitude of books he wrote, and the 


?3 Chron. Cass. lib. iii. cap. vii. lxiii. ; lib.i. cap. xxxiii. 
Pet. Diac. De viris ill. cap. xii. xix. 

?! (jan. vol. ii, p. 112. 118. ; lib. x. cap. ii, Leo. p. 413. 
Vita Desideri. 


19 INTRODUCTION. 


number and fame of his scholars, having raised the 
reputation of the school of Salerno to the greatest 
height. Some of his works have been printed, and 
others remain in manuscript ?^. 

'The names of few of his disciples have been re- 
corded. We find mention, however, of Atto, chap- 
lain to the empress Agnes, who translated the works 
of his master from various languages into Latin*$6. 


Another, John, the physician, an eloquent and 


learned man, who published a book of Aphorisms, 
and died at Naples, where he deposited the books 
written by his master. Gariopontus seems likewise 
to have been a contemporary ?7. 

It may not be uninteresting to ascertain the other 
celebrated physicians of Salerno in the twelfth cen- 
tury, and soon after the time when the Schola Sa- 
lerni was written. "The earliest whose name occurs 
is Nicholaus, who, amongst other works, wrote a 
book, still extant, entitled Antidotarium, upon medi- 


?» Constantini Africani Opera. Das. apud Hen. Peter. 


1539.— Bib. Bod. His history appears originally in the Chron. 
Casin. lib. iii. cap. xxxv. and Peter Diaconus, de Vir. Cas. cap. 
xxii. From thence in Murat. Ant. Ital. vol. iii. diss. xliv. 
p.934. Gian. vol. i. p. 123. Fabric. Bib. Grac. vol. xiii. p. 
:123. Bib. Med. Latin, vol. i. p. 1192, etc. 

?5 P, Diac. De viris ill. cap. xxix. 

?; Moreau. Prolegom. p. 11. 


"cp 


INTRODUCTION. 138 


cines, which was thought to have been the summit 
of medical knowledge. It was commented upon by 
John Platearius, in the middle of the twelfth cen- 
tury, and many other writers?.  Musandinus wrote 
upon Diet, Maurus upon Urine and Phlebotomy. 
The specific works of John Castalius, Matthew 
Solomon, and Richardus Senior, are not enumerated. 
There were other learned men who studied medicine 
at Salerno in that century, but removed to other 
places, such as saint Bruno, bishop of Signia, after- 
wards abbot of Casino, again bishop, and who died 
in 1126 ; Romualdus the second, archbishop of Sa- 
lerno from 1157 to 1181, who attended William 
king of Sicily as his physician in 1127; Saladinus 
Asculanus, physician to the prince of Tarentum in 
1163?9, 

Nor was the healing art confined to men only, 
there were many of the fair sex who were celebrated 
for their medical skil. The time when most of 
them flourished is uncertain, but probably in the 
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries.  Or- 
dericeus Vitalis speaks of a woman unequalled in 


?3 Antidotarium Nicholai cum Expositione J. Platearii. Ve- 
net. 1589. 
?? A?gidius Corboliensis, vide post. Peter Diaconus, Mazza, 
etc. 
C 


14 INTRODUCTION. 


medicine in 1059», Abella wrote a poem in two 
books, De Atrabile et de Naturà Seminis Humani. 
Mercuriadis composed books, De Crisibus, de Febre 
Pestilenti; de Curatione Vulnerum, de Unguentis. 
Rebecca, a work De Febribus, de Urinis, et de Em- 
bryone. 'Trotta or Trottula's book De Mulierum 
Passionibus ante, in, et post, partum, is allowed to 
be a forgery. Sentia Guerna lectured in medicine, 
and Constantia Calenda received the honour of the 
doctorate ?!, 

It would be tedious to mention all the learned 
men who studied physic at Salerno after the twelfth 
century, of whom Mazza has given a long catalogue. 
From these we may however except John de Procida, 
a nobleman and physician of Salerno, the friend and 
physician of Manfred king of Sicily, and the author 
and adviser of the Sicilian Vespers. 

When the Regimen Sanitatis was written, the 
professors contented themselves with the humble 
title of the School of Salerno. By the privileges of 
subsequent sovereigns it was gradually constituted a 


3? Robertus Mala-Corona Physice scientiam tam copiose 
habuit, ut in urbe Psalernitanà, ubi maximz medicorum schola 
ab antiquo tempore habentur, neminem in medicinali arte, 
preter quandam sapientem mulierem, sibi parem inveniret. 
Orderic. Vital. Eccl. Hist. lib. i1. ad annum 1057. 

31 /Egidius Corbol.; Diaconus; Mazza, etc. 


INTRODUCTION. 15 


regular university. Ruggiero king of Sicily, about 
the year 1137, enacted a law, that all who designed 
to practise medicine should be examined and ap- 
proved by his officials and judges, under the penalty 
of the confiscation of all their goods. By officials it 
is supposed that the physicians of Salerno were 
understood, as he had lately given great privileges 
to that city. The emperor Frederic the second, 
having established likewise an university at Naples, 
published ediets for its government, which were 
finally promulgated in 1231. "The study of physic, 
and lectures in that art, were restrained to those two 
universities. Students were to apply themselves to 
logic for three years before they commenced the 
study of medicine, which they were to pursue for 
five years. Nor were they then admitted till they 
had practised for one year under an expert physician. 
After a public examination the university of Salerno 
had full power to grant a license to practise, that of 
Naples could only certify the sufficiency of the can- 
didate to the king, or his chancellor, who granted the 
licence. The names of doctor and master were not 
then known as specific titles of honour, but were 
used in their original significations, for teachers, or 
persons skilled in their art. "The licenced prac- 
titioners took an oath to observe the regulations 
respecting medicines, to inform the court if apothe- 


16 INTRODUCTION. 


caries did not prepare their drugs properly, and to . 
give advice to the poor gratis. Every physician was 
to visit his patient at least twice a day, and once in 
the night if necessary, and was not to receive for his 
attendance more than half a golden tarena? daily, 
or,if called out of the city, three tarenze and his 
expenees, or four tarenz to provide himself. He 
was not to undertake to cure a disorder for a specific 
sum, or to keep an apothecary's shop, or to be in 

partnership with an apothecary. Surgeons were to | 
study for one year, and to be perfect in anatomy 
before they were admitted to practise. Apothecaries 
were to take an oath to compound their medicines 
according to the forms prescribed, and for a fixed 
price, which for simple drugs was three tarenz an 
ounce. Such were the regulations of the emperor 
Frederic?. The three professions appear to have 


3? A gold coin which weighed twenty grains, and would now 
be worth four shillings and twopence.  Quaálibet uncià compu- 
tatà pro quinque florenis, et quolibet floreno pro sex tarenis, et 
quàlibet tarenà pro duobus Carolinis, et quolibet Carolino pro 
decem granis. Ducange. 

33 Giannone, vol. ii. p. 387. The constitutions are in many 
collections, the last is F. Pauli Canciani Barbarorum Leges 
Antiqui, 3 vols. fol. Venice, 1781, in vol. i. p. 367. See the 
Epistles of Peter de Vineis, Frederici chancellar, lib. iii. epist. 
10, 11. 13. The constitution is entitled De Probabili Experi- 
entià Medicorum. 


INTRODUCTION. 157. 


been kept distinct as early as the time of Avenzoar, 
who flourished at Seville in 980, or even in the time 
of Celsus ?*. | 

These constitutions, and the privileges of the 
university of Salerno, were confirmed and extended 
by other princes, and were in force in modern times. 
They are the most ancient medical statutes in 
Europe, and are curious in showing the state of the 
medical professions in those early times. When 
fully established, the university consisted of ten 
doctors, of whom the eldest had the title of prior. 
Their common seal bore the image of saint Matthew, 
their patron saint, whose body had been given to 
them by Robert Guiscard??, and the inscription of 
CivrrAs HiePocRamTis. Students were admitted to 
the doctorate by the solemn form of having a book 
put into their hands, a ring on their fingers, a crown 
of laurel on their heads, and a kiss on their 
cheeks 36, 

The medical science of the Arabians, thus intro- 
duced into Salerno, was in substance that of the 
Greeks, from whom it was derived. In the theory 


?* Freind, Historia Medicinz, edit. Paris, p. 253. Le Clerc, 
Hist. Med. p. 334. 
?» Leo. Ast. lib. iii. cap. xlv. p. 461. 
39 Anton. Mazza, cap. ix. Freind, Hist. Med. 
c2 


18 INTRODUCTION. 


and cure of diseases they followed the opinions of 
Hippocrates and Galen: not indeed in their native 
simplicity, but often corrupted bv their own vain and 
fanciful inventions, by the superstitions of astrology, 
and the follies of alehemy? . Yet it is admitted that 
the modern science of medicine owes much to their 
improvements. They greatly extended the Materia 
Medica by the introduction of many efhcacious re- 
medies. "They added to the list of medical plants. 
The first, but very gradual, introduction of chemistry 
into medicine is wholly theirs ??, and many of their 
formule of compound medicines still retain a place 
in modern dispensatories. In many things of practice 
they ventured to differ from their masters, as in less 
copious bleedings, in milder purgatives, in substitut- 
ing sugar for honey in their syrups, and they first 
gratified the eyes and the taste of their patients by 
clothing their prescriptions in gold and silver leaf; 
a luxury which continued till within a few years. 


3 Freind, p. 479. Gian. vol. ii. p. 119. sect. 3. 

33 Rhazes is the first medical writer who mentions chemical 
medicines, and the mode of preparing them. He died in 932. 
AI the chemistry that is to be found in Greek writers relates to 
the fusion, or transmutation of metals. Freind, p. 213. 


INTRODUCTION. 19 


1l. OF ROBERT DUKE OF NORMANDY. 


Such was the situation of the country, and the 
state of medical science at Salerno, when Robert 
duke of Normandy, the eldest son of William the 
Conqueror, having mortgaged his dukedom for ten 
thousand marks to his brother William Rufus, set 
out upon his expedition to Palestine. "Plhis army of 
the crusaders, which consisted of Britons, N ormans, 
and French, was conducted principally by Hugh the 
Great count of Vermandois, the duke of Normandy, 
Robert count of Flanders, Stephen count of Chartres 
and Blois, Eustace count of Bologne, and Odo 
bishop of Bayeux. Whilst Godfrey of Bouillon with 
his companions marched through Hungary, this di- 
vision left France, in September 1096, and crossed 
the Alps into Italy. At Lucca they received the 
benediction of the pope, visited the tombs of the 
apostles at Rome, and repaired to Salerno, the 
metropolis of the Norman dutchy of Apulia. Robert 
of Normandy was nearly related to the reigning 
family. Ruggiero, the duke, had married Adela, 
Robert's first cousin, the daughter of Robert le 
Frison, who was brother to Matilda, the wife of 
. William the Conqueror. 'lhe season was too far 
advanced to proceed safely by sea to the coast of 


20 INTRODUCTION. 


Epirus. "The impetuosity, however, of the counts 
of Vermandois and Flanders impelled them to brave 
the dangers of the sea, and to pass over with their 
troops. The duke of Normandy, and the counts of 
Chartres and Bologne, passed the winter at Salerno. 
In the April following they proceeded on their ex- 
pedition from the ports of Apulia?». In their way 
to Bari they visited the monastery of mount Casino, 
to recommend themselves to the prayers of the 
monks, and the protection of saint Benedict ?. From 
hence they sailed over to Durazzo, arrived at Con- 
stantinople, and joined the armies of the crusaders 
at the siege of Nice. 

It is unnecessary to relate here the prodigies of 
valour performed by duke Hobert in Palestine. 
After the conquest of the holy city, the victory at 
Ascalon, the election of Godfrey, and the establish- 
ment of the kingdom of Jerusalem, the greater part 
of the crusaders returned home, crowned with glory, 


3? Gesta Francorum Expugnantium Hierosol. Anon. 2. in 
Bongars, vol. i. p. 562. sect. 4. Mat. Paris, Lond. 1684, à 
Watts, p. 24. Isti omnes (Robertus, etc.) in Apulia et Calabria, 
circa hyemis ingruentis initium, nivium et glaciorum vitantes 
incommoda, expectabant, donec felicior aura arrideret. 

^? Pet, Diaconus, lib. iv. cap.ii. p. 498. Mabillon, vol. v. 
p. 238. 


INTRODUCTION. 2] 


and exhausted by their labours. "The duke of Nor- 
iandy and the count of Flanders, by the way of 
Constantinople, returned into Apulia in September, 
1090. Robert was received by his countrymen and 
relations, Ruggiero count of Sicily, and his nephew 
Ruggiero duke of Apulia, with the cordiality and 
honours due to the successful champions of the cross, 
and in a round of festivities they forgot the suffer- 
ings of their Christian warfare. Robert was van- 
quished by the charms of Sybilla, the daughter of 
Geoffrey count of Conversano, the nephew of Robert 
Guiscard. She was a lady of great beauty, elegant 
manners, and superior understanding. At a sub- 
sequent period, after their return to Normandy, she 
was said to have conducted the affairs of the dutehy, 
during his temporary absences, with more judgment 
than her imprudent husband. He had a son by her 
named William, who became count of Flanders. 
Yet she appears to have fallen early a sacrifice to 
the envy and factiousness of some Norman ladies of 
nobility. Upon this marriage, from his father-in-law 
and other friends, Robert received a large treasure 
to enable him to redeem his dominions ?. 


?? As our general historians give little account of this mar- 
riage, and the lady, I extract the following passages from the 
original historians. ^ See Gesta Francorum in Bongarsius's 


29 INTRODUCTION. 


Besides visiting his Norman friends, a prineipal 
object in Robert's return to Italy was to consult the 
physieians of Salerno for a wound which he had 
received in his right arm from an arrow supposed to 
have been poisoned, and which had degenerated into 


collection, vol. i. p. 578. sect. 32. Albertus Aquensis, lib. vi. 
cap. lii. liv. Ordericus Vitalis, in Duchesne's Gesta Nor- 
mannorum, p. 780. In anno 1100, consules (comites Robertus, 
etc.) cum suis reciperunt se, et à Normannis in Italia amicabi- 
litér suscepti sunt. Rogerius Sicilia comes, ejusque nepos 
Rogerius, Apulie dux, atque Goiffredus de Conversano, nepos 
Guiscardi ducis, aliique compatriote seu cognati eorum, salvo 
reditu gavisi sunt, et fatigatos pro Christo in multis agonibus 
pugiles letificare conati sunt. Tunc ibi Rodbertus, Norman- 
nie dux, generosam virginem adamavit Sibyllam, Goiffredi de 
Conversaná filiam, desponsavit, et secum in Neustriam adduxit. 
—AÀ suo socero, qui Dominus Brundusii erat, et ab aliis amicis, 
copiam auri et argenti, rerumque preciosarum, obtinuit: ex 
quorum donis ingentem pecuniam accumulavit, quam reddere 
creditori, ut suum ducatum quieté reciperet, providé destinavit 
Will. Gemetricensis Hist. Norman. lib. viii. cap. xiv. p. 299. 
In Duchesne Gesta Normannorum, and Cambden's collection, 
p. 672. Sibyllam, sororem Willielmi comitis Conversanze— 
Fuit pradicta comitissa pulerà facie, honestis moribus, sapientià 
praedita, et aliquando, absente duce, ipsa melius per se negotia 
provincie, tam privata quam publica, disponebat quam ipse 
facerat si adesset. Vixit autem in Normannia parvo tempore, 
invidià et factione quarundam nobilium foeminarum decepta. 


INTRODUCTION. 93 


a deep ulcer, called a fistula ?. "The story that the 
poison was sucked out by his affectionate wife 
during his sleep, is probably one of the romantic 
tales of that romantic period, and has been told of 
other heroes. "That his cure was owing to the skill 
of the doctors of Salerno is more probable. .Amidst 
the hospitality of his countrymen, the luxuries of 
Italy, and the endearments of his bride, Robert 
wasted near a year, and by this delay he lost the 
crown of England, and ended a brave but impru- 
dent life in a captivity of eight and twenty years ^. 


IIl. HISTORY OF THE SCHOLA SALERNITANA. 


It is the received opinion that during Robert's 
continuance in Italy, or soon after, this poem, the 
Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum, was composed, for 
the preservation of his health, by the physicians of 
Salerno 5. The name, indeed, of the king of 
England, to whom it is dedicated, is not mentioned 


453 Auctor Chronici Normannorum, à Moreau laudatus in 
Proleg. p. 17. | Gian. lib. x. cap. ii. sect. 3. p. 125. 

^ Ordericus Vitalis, etc. 

f (Gran: vol. 1: p.125. hb. x. cap. n. sect. 9. Muratori, 
Antiq. Ital. vol. in. dissert. xliv. col. 935. — Moreau Proleg. 
p» 17. etc. etc. 


24 INTRODUCTION. 


in the poem itself, or by the original commentator, 
Arnaldus de Villà Nováà. But the authority of 
Giannone, the historian of Naples, probably founded 
upon original documents, is sufficient to establish 
the fact, which is confirmed by many other cireum- 
stances. 

l1. That the poem was written as early as the end 
of the eleventh century is evident from its being 
referred to and imitated by /Egidius Corboliensis, in 
the middle of the twelfth century, and the early 
imitations of it by the universities of Paris and 
Montpelier. 

2. No other king of England was so connected 
with Salerno. Richard the first, indeed, was there 
in his way to Palestine, in 1190, but this was at too 
late a period. Muratori, after stating the general 
opinion, that it was Robert of Normandy, expresses 
some doubts of it, and supposes that it was Edward 
the Confessor, for which he gives two reasons, both 
equally frivolous. The first is, that the school of 
Salerno was famous for medical science in his reign. 
But this proves nothing, since it was equally cele- 
brated both before and after that time. — Secondly, 
that Robert of Normandy was never king of 
England. 'Phis is as futile: he had a just hereditary 
right to his throne of England, and under every 
title was the lawful successor of William Rufus. 





INTRODUCTION. 925 


He was king de jure, if not de,facto. And it is 
plain from the ancient writers that he was so styled 
and considered 4. ^ Peter Diaconus, whose work was 
taken from the records of the abbey of mount 
Casino, expressly calls him king of England, fKod- 
bertus rex Anglorum, and relates, that he sent 
ambassadors to the monastery, with the present of a 
golden cup to saint Benedict, requesting the monks 
to pray for the good estate of his kingdom *.. 

3. There is the internal evidence arising from the 
recipe for the cure of a fistula, the only prescription 
of a very professional nature contained in the poem, 
and for which it would be difficult to assign a reason 
unless it were written for the use of a person who 
laboured under that complaint. 

In some of the copies of the Regimen Sanitatis it 
is dedicated to a king of France: 


56 Pagi in Ann. Daron. vol. vi. p. 298, follows Muratori, 
without assigning any reasons. 

" Regnum Anglie ipsi Roberto duci contingebat, tam jure 
nature, quam regni consuetudine. Bernardus 'Thesaurarius. 
In Muratori, vol. vii. cap. Ixxxi. p. 728.—His porró diebus Rod- 
bertus rex Anglorum legatos ad hoc monasterium direxit, petens 
ut pro se atque pro statu regni sui domini clementiam exorarent, 
calicemque aureum, quantitatis non modice, beato Benedicto per 
eos dirigere studuit. Pet. Diaconus, lib. iv. cap. lxiii, p. 529. 

D 


26 INTRODUCTION. 
Francorum Regi scripsit Schola tota Salerni. 


TThis is said to have been Charlemagne, and that he 
founded the school of Salerno. "That opinion is mani- 
festly erroneous. As a mere seminary of medicine 
it was in existence before the time of Charlemagne, 
and it was not constituted an university till long after. 
The city, besides, was never in his power, but resisted 
his authority 4. "Phe oldest, the best, and indeed 
the great majority of copies, both manuscript and 
printed, have Anglorum regi, and the other reading is 
evidently supposititious. This fraudulent alteration of 
the dedication, from the king of England to Charle- 
magne, and the assertion that it was presented to 
him after he had conquered the Saracens at Ronce- 
vaux, betrays its origin 49. "That mean spirit of 
envy, too often found amongst even superior French- 
men, could not bear that so popular a poem should 
be connected with an English monarch, and the 
attributing a victory to Charlemagne at the battle of 
Roncevaux is a ridiculous gasconade, of which the 
falsehood has been proclaimed to all Europe by the 
trumpet of Ariosto. 

This poem, which is entitled in the oldest edi- 


38 Giannone, vol. i. p. 990 ; vol. ii. p. 122. 
^ 'Tempore quo idem rex Saracenos devicit in Runcivalle. 


INTRODUCTION. 27 


tions, Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum, or Flos 
Medicinz, though written in the name of the whole 
School of Salerno, is usually attributed to John de 
Milano. His name is aflixed to it in many manu- 
scripts, one as old as 1418?9, but whether it occurs 
in any which are antecedent to the fifteenth century 
is doubtful, nor is it to be found in the earliest 
printed editions. Arnaldus de Villà Novà, the first 
commentator on the work, and who died in 1363, 
states only that it was published by the doctors of 
Salerno. The name of John de Milano does not 
appear in the catalogues of the learned men of that 
university, in the Chronicle of Casino, or the Con- 
tinuation by Peter Diaconus. Noris he mentioned 
by JEgidius Corboliensis, who enumerates the most 
celebrated .physicians of that place at that period. 
Yet that it should be so generally ascribed, in later 
times, to a person whose very name is not elsewhere 
to be found, unless it were known from undisputed 
and undeviating tradition, and ancient authorities, it 
is difficult to conceive. 

Who he was, where he lived, or what share he 
had in the poem, are equally unknown. There 
was indeed a John, a monk of mount Casino, said 


59 Codex Tullovianus, and Codex Altorfianus vel Trewianus. 
. See Catalogue of MSS. 


928 INTRODUCTION. 


by Peter Diaconus to have been a learned and elo- 
quent physician, a disciple of Constantine, and to 
have flourished in 1075, who may be the person?!. 
He quitted his monastery, and died at Naples, 
where he deposited the works of Constantine. "The 
time and the other circumstances do not disagree, 
but Peter Diaconus does not mention his surname, 
and though he speaks of a medical book of Apho- 
risms written by him, he says nothing there, or any- 
where else, of the Schola Salerni. "The evidence in 
his favour is therefore very slight. 


IV. SUBJECT OF THE SCHOLA SALERNITANA. 


From the state of medicine at the time the poem 
was written, it is evident from what sources its pre- 
cepts must have been derived. "The industry of 
commentators has traced every doctrine to its Greek, 
Latin, or Arabian origin. In the work itself, Hippo- 
crates, Galen, and Pliny, are expressly quoted: but 
the author was principally indebted to the poem De 
Virtutibus Herbarum, which was composed by 
Odo, or Odobanus, a physician in the dark ages, in 


91 De viris illust. Casinens, cap. 35. 


INTRODUCTION. 29 


the name of /Emilius Macer, a Roman poet, the 
contemporary of Virgil, Ovid, and Tibullus, and 
who wrote upon similar subjects, but whose works 
have perished?. From this poem much of what 
relates to plants is taken. Above sixteen articles, 
containing about forty lines, are borrowed from it 
verbatim et literatim. Other lines are occasionally 
introduced, together with the substance of other 
parts. 

Though much of this work, derived from the 
fanciful doctrines of the Arabian physicians, is now 
become obsolete, on account of the more extensive 
knowledge of modern times, and though many of the 
virtues attributed to meats, drinks, and herbs, are 
imaginary, yet it is but justice to observe, that the 
greater part of the general rules, being founded in 
good sense and experience, are truly excellent, are 
caleulated for all ages and climates, and form an 
useful compendium of practical directions for securing 
a sound mind in a sound body. 

The professed object of a poem, which was not 
designed for physicians, but for an unlearned sove- 


3? Fabric. Med. et inf. Latin, etc. It is entitled Macer de 
Virtutibus Herbarum. I have used Ranzovius's edition, 
Lipsim, 1590. Scaliger says of him, neque poeta, neque bonus 
medicus, neque sincerus versificator. 


D3 


30 INTRODUCTION. 


reign, and for general use, was rather the preserva- 
tion of health than the cure of diseases. It does not 
enter, therefore, into any abstruse discussions, and 
what relates to theory only, is confined to a superficial 
description of the anatomy of the body, in stating 
merely the number of the bones, the teeth, and the 
veins; and in treating more at large the four 
humours, which were of great importance in the 
ancient medicine, were held to be the great store- 
houses of the human fabric, and to form the great 
characteristics of the constitution. 

The means prescribed for the preservation of 
heallh, consist in the due observation of the six non- 
naturals*?, air, food, exercise, sleep, the excretions, 
and the passions. 'To these heads may be reduced 
the various rules, ofliving in a salubrious air, and 
observing the changeful seasons: the minute detail 
of all kinds of meat and drink, and the qualities of 
herbs, which constitute the great bulk of the poem: 
frequent exercise and ablutions: avoiding sleep at 
improper times, not neglecting the calls of nature, 
and avoiding care, and all other violent agitations of 
the mind. 

For the cure of diseases a general remedy is 


33 Strangely so called because they are external, and not parts 
of the natural body. 


INTRODUCTION. 3l 


recommended in cheerfulness, rest, and temperance: 
and diet is asserted to be more important than 
medicine. "The diseases treated of are only the 
common affections, which scarcely require the aid of 
a physician; such as colds, coughs, surfeits, colics, 
worms, the swelling of the glands, trifling injuries 
to the teeth, the sight, and the hearing; and there 
are many antidotes against poison, the constant sub- 
ject of apprehension to our ignorant, and therefore 
suspicious, ancestors. "The medicines recommended 
are of the simplest nature, the common food of the 
kitchen, and the produce of the herb garden. "The 
only composition which is of a more dispensatorial 
form, is the application for the cure of a fistula, 
evidently suggested by the disease of duke Robert, 
and which is compounded. of chemical ingredients, 
arsenic, sulphur, lime, and soap. The very ample 
directions relating to bleeding, must be referred to 
the prevalence of that practice upon all occasions, 
and amongst all orders of people. 

The style is of course somewhat barbarous, and 
the inaccuracies have probably been multiplied by 
the mistakes of transcribers. In many places the 
grammar can hardly defend itself. ^ The a«ve«e- 
^ovU;a and change of person are frequent. The 
conjunctions, and other particles, are sometimes 
deficient, and at others redundant. "The arrange- 


239 INTRODUCTION. 


ment in general is not immethodical, though some 
few lines seem misplaced. 

In the versification, the quantity of syllables, and 
even the accent, are frequently disregarded. Many 
lines are without rhyme, such as some which are 
transcribed from Macer. The rhyme is usually 
correct, though sometimes only the final vowels 
correspond, and the accent, in reading, must be 
transferred to the last syllable. Usually the ends 
of two or more lines rhyme together, sometimes the 
middle with the end, at others both the middle and 
end of one line with the corresponding parts of the 
next. 


V. COMMENTATORS, AND PRINCIPAL PRINTED 
EDITIONS. 


A poem upon a subject so generally interesting, free 
from technical abstruseness, and conveyed in a pleas- 
ing and popular form, was soon circulated throughout 
Europe. It became a manual for those who were 
not regularly initiated into medical science, it was 
the institute of the student, and the text-book for 
the learned professors. Copies were multiplied, and 
upon the invention of printing it was committed to 
the press as early as the year 1480. It was repeat- 


INTRODUCTION. 323 


edly republished in most of the cities of Europe, 
translated into every language, and illustrated by 
voluminous comments. Inthe various hands through 
which it passed, the text was subjected to many 
alterations, to omissions, additions, and corruptions, 
from illiterate or careless copyists, and still more 
from learned and presumptuous critics ?*. 

The earliest commentator was Arnaldus de Villà 
Novà, one of the most celebrated men of the 
thirteenth century, as a physician, a chemist, an 
astrologer, and a divine. By his own account he 
was born at Milan, the year of his birth is uncer- 
tain. After studying at Paris and Montpelier, he 
visited the academies of Italy, and the Arabian 
' Schools in Spain, and was familiar with the Hebrew, 
the Arabic, and the Greek languages. Finally he 
established himself at Barcelona, whence he was 
styled Catalanus. He was the pupil of Peter de 
Apono, a celebrated divine, and the friend of Ray- 
mond Lully. In 1276, he cured Pope Innocent the 
fifth of the plague, by his famous tincture of gold. 
He was in great favour with James the second, king 
of Arragon, who employed him in 1309 in a negotia- 


^ See the catalogue of printed editions—of which I have 
described one hundred and sixty. See there specimens of 
various translations. 


34 INTRODUCTION. 


tion with the pope, relating to his claim to the title 
of king of Jerusalem. As a great master in theology 
he held a public disputation at Bourdeaux, with 
Martin de Athera, a Dominican friar, in the presence 
of Clement the fifth. His opinions in divinity were 
published in France and Spain, and accorded with 
those of Peter de Ápono: but having treated the 
monks and the mass with too great freedom, the 
clergy become his enemies. His tenets were con- 
demned as heretical, by the faculty of theology at 
Paris in 1309, and by the inquisition at Arragon in 
1317, and many of his works are inserted in the 
Index Expurgatorius. The propositions which were 
censured, amongst others, were these: that the 
devil had caused the whole Christian people to 
deviate from the truth, and had left only the skin of 
religion, and the faith of devils—that the monks 
corrupt the Christian doctrines, are without Christian 
charity, and will all be damned—that masses for the 
dead are ineffectual, and that works of mercy are 
more acceptable to God than the sacrifice of the 
altar?. When his master Peter de Apono was pro- 
secuted by the inquisition, he fled for protection to 
Frederic of Arragon, king of Sicily, the brother of 


55 Eymeric. Directorium Inquisitorium. Venice, 1607, p. 
265, etc, In p. 316, is a catalogue of his forbidden works. 


INTRODUCTION. 925 


king James. To gratify his new patron he wrote 
his Commentary upon the Schola Salerni, which 
poem was justly esteemed as an honour to the king- 
doms of Naples and Sicily. It has been said, that 
he was sent by Frederic to cure the pope, and died 
upon the voyage. The time of his death seems to 
have been in or before the year 1313, for in that 
year, in the council of Vienna, pope Clement the 
fifth wrote circular letters to inform all persons who 
might have it in their possession, to produce his 
book De Praxi Medicá, which Arnald had promised 
to send him, but had died in the meanwhile. His 
works in medicine, chemistry, alchemy, astrology, 
and divinity, are very numerous. "They were first 
collected and printed at Leyden in 1504, at Venice 
in 1505 in folio, and afterwards, after some inter- 
mediate editions, more correctly at Basil in 1585. 
In some of his works he styles himself Domini Pape 
Physicus, and Boniface the eighth was accused of 
heresy for approving of his writings. "The following 
works relating to the same subjects with the Schola 
Salerni may be mentioned. His treatise de Con- 
servatione Corporis, dedicated to king Frederic, was 
frequently printed with his comment on the Schola 
Salerni. Another work, entitled Regimen Sanitatis, 
was dedicated to the king of Arragon, James the 
second, and was often printed ; but at length Mag- 


36 INTRODUCTION. 


ninus, or Magnus, a physician of Milan, having 
made some additions and alterations, put his own 
name to it, and it has since been attributed to him. 
There is a work of Arnaldus, De Conservandá 
Juventute, el. Retlardandá Senectute, and another 
de Regimine Castra Sequentiumi, of the same class*6. 

Vila Nova's commentary is succinct, clear, and 
to the purpose. It well explains the precepts ac- 
cording to the system of physic then received, and 
confirms them by the authorities of Aristotle, Hippo- 
crates, Galen, Avicenna, Rases, Averroes, and other 
eminent writers, who were the genuine sources from 
whence they were derived. From its first appear- 
ance this commentary always accompanied the text, 
and it was printed with it in the earliest editions. 
The fame of Arnald was inseparably connected with 
that of the poem, which was even sometimes attri- 
buted to him. Though subsequent editions may 
have refined the language, and multiplied authorities 
and illustrations, the original work of Villa Nova 


56 Arnaldi vita à Campegio, prefixed to his works. Basil, 
1585. Fabric. Bib. Med. Lat. vol. i. p. 358.  Freind's Hist. 
Med. Shaw's Notes to Boerhaave's Chemistry. Bibliotheca 
Hispana à Nicholao Antonio Hispalensi, 1788, vol. 1i. p. 112. 
Niceron, Memoires des Hommes illustres, vol. xxxiv. p. 8. 

For Magninus, or Magnus's, plagiarism, see Arnaldi Opera, 
Lugd. 1509, folio 59. 





INTRODUCTION. 27 


has served as the basis, and has supplied the most 
valuable part of their commentaries ?9. 

The next commentators were John Curio and 
James Crellius, two physicians of Erford in Ger- 
many. The earliest edition of their work was printed 
at Frankfort in 1538. In the dedication to that of 
1545, they profess to have altered and amended the 
text, and to have restored the verses to correct pro- 
sody, except where the rhyme restrained them. "Their 
commentary is little more than a paraphrase of that 
of Villa Nova, of which they say they have polished 
the rude language, amended the errors, purged it from 
barbarisms, corrected the quotations, turned them 
into better Latin, retrenched superfluities, supplied 
omissions, rejected absurdities, and replaced them 
by sounder doctrines. In 1556, Curio alone pub- 
lished a new edition, in which he retained the same 
text, added an old German translation, and a com- 
mentary, which isa fuller paraphrase of Villa Nova's, 
with many additions. From this time the original 
commentary was superseded, and this paraphrase 
was substituted in its place, with few or no altera- 
tions: but the name of Villa Nova was still retained. 

Renatus Moreau, a physician of Paris, began a 
more enlarged edition, of which a part was published 


7 See after, a specimen of his commentary. 
E 


38 INTRODUCTION. 


in 1625, dedicated to cardinal Richlieu. He re- 
duced the text of the poem, which is mostly that of 
Curio and Crellius, into a new method, added 
many verses from manuscripts, illustrated it by the 
commentary of Villa Nova as reformed by Curio, 
Crellius, and Constanson *??, and his own copious ani- 
madversions. It was his object to render it a per- 
fect treatise of medicine, and he divides it into three 
parts, £he prophylactic, the therapeutic, and the 
semiolic. '"lhe first includes the six non-naturals: 
the second, medicine in general, and the cure of 
particular diseases: the third, the signs of health. 
For this purpose, what is wanting in the text, or the 
preceding commentaries, is s: ppl ed by his own ani- 
madversions, which, under s me heads, are extremely 
long?. But he has published only a part of his 
plan, comprehending only the two first heads of the 
prophylactie division ; air and food. 

'The last and most usual edition is that of Zacha- 
rius Sylvius, a physician of Rotterdam, of which the 
dedication is dated in 1648. The text is nearly in 
the same order in which it was originally published, 


58 [ have never seen any edition by Constanson, but from 
what appears of it in Moreau, I believe he made but little altera- 
tion either in the text or comments. 

59 '|'h- animadversion on air, forinstance, occupies above sixty 
close printed pages. 


INTRODUCTION. 39 


corrected by that of Curio. The commentary is 
that of Villa Nova as it was reformed by Curio. 
Moreau's additions to the text, and his animad- 
versions, are omitted, though the editor professes 
to have used that edition. This has often been 
reprinted, and constitutes what may be considered 
as the editio recepta. 

Of editions printed without the commentary, in 
which any remarkable alterations were made in the 
text, I know of two only. 

John Francis Lombard endeavoured to give the 
poem a more classical form, and by discarding rhyme, 
and changing some ofthe language, to reduce it to 
correct prosody. It was first published in 1566, at 
the end of a synopsis of writers upon the baths and 
wonders of Puteoli?. "The following are some ex- 
tracts from it—it commences : | 


Anglorum Regi scribit schola tota Salerni. 
S1 vis incolumem, et sanam traducere vitam, 
Curas tolle graves, motus ferventis et irz, 
Parce mero, sit ccena brevis tibi, surge parumper 


$9 Jo. Francisci Lombardi, eorum quz de balneis aliisque 
miraculis Puteolanis scripta sunt synopsis. In calce tria opera 
medica. Venice, 1566. "This seems to be a second edition. 
Printed again in Italia Illustrata. Frank. 1600. And in Bur- 
man. Thesaur. Antiq. Ital. vol. ix. part iv. 


40 INTRODUCTION. 


Post epulas, medie somnumque propelle diei: 
Comprime vesice pariter nec pondera ventris. 
Hec si servabis per szecula plurima vives. 

S1 desint medici hos canones servare memento, 
Presstantis medici poterunt qui munere fungi. 
Mens sit lta, quies, mediocris regula victüs. 


Post balnea sumpta, calore 


Membra fove, haud studeas post prandia: frigidus et si 
Forte eris, haud subitó, paulatim at sume calorem. 





Post pisces nux una juvat, nocet altera, mors est 
Tertia: divinet qui vult enigma poete 9, 


Dic homo cur moritur cui salvia crescit in horto ?— 
Nullus hortus contra letum medicamina prestat. 
Salvia confortat nervos, manuumque tremorem 
Tollit, ope ipsius fugit illicó febris acuta. 


It concludes, 


Hec sunt quz scripsit Regi Schola docta Salerni. 
Dogmata quz totum lustrant per szecula mundum, 
Testentur studia antiqui ut permagna Salerni. 


Reginald Bruytsma, a physician of Mechlin, in 
1636, printed at Douay an edition without commen- 
tary or notes, in which he newly arranged the text, 


$1 "These two passages are quoted to illustrate some obscurities 
in the original text. 





INTRODUCTION. AI 


and intermixed with it four hundred verses of his 
own composition, distinguished from the original by 
being in the elegiac metre, and without rhyme. It 
is entitled, Novo-antiqua Schola Salernitana. It 
begins: 


Corpore tu quicunque voles, animoque valere, 
Sinceráà jugiter mente precare Deum. 

Hinc noscenda tui tibi sunt primordia prima 
Corporis, et quinam sit status inde tibi. 

Cognita quz certam possint monstrare salutem, 
Ne malé conveniens ingredieris iter. 

Ergo rudes simul hec, simul et versate periti, 
Omnibus iste potest utilis esse labor. 

Sunt duo, mens, corpus, fragilis primordia vite: 
Illius celum est, hujus origo solum: 

Vilius idque licet, constat tamen ex elementis 
Quatuor, et sunt hzc, aer, aqua, ignis, humus. 


Having given an account of the commentators, 
and principal printed editions, I shall now proceed 
to describe such manuscripts as have come within 
my knowledge. 


VI. THE MANUSCHBIPTS. 


The manuscripts of the Schola Salernitana differ 
essentially in the number of lines, in the variety of 
readings, the additions, and the order. Whilst 

E 3 


49 INTRODUCTION. 


Villa Nova has only three hundred and sixty-three 
lines, Moreau mentions, that a manuscript belonging 
to Naudius had only one hundred and eighty-three, 
his own had six hundred and sixty-four, that of 
Trews one thousand and seventy three, Tullou's 
one thousand and ninety-six, and Schenk's one 
thousand two hundred and thirty-nine. Some of the 
Oxford manuscripts have one thousand and eighty, 
others one thousand nine hundred €, 

Those which I have seen, and probably the foreign 
manuscripts, may be reduced to three classes. 

FinsT. Those which agree with Villa Nova's text, 
with occasional various readings, and small differ- 
ences. "These are of little value, and I believe are 
most of them copied from the printed editions. 

SrEcowpLY. Those which have Villa Nova's text 
for their basis, preserving its character, yet having 
considerable additions, and alterations. 

The rninp class of manuscripts contains a poem 
in which the Schola Salerni is incorporated, but 
differs entirely from the other classes, in a more 
methodical arrangement, in very great, and more 
scientific, additions. "The manuscripts vary in 
length, but some of them contain near nineteen 


$2 Moreau's Prolegomena, p. 4. Schenk, Bibl. Med. See 
the catalogue of MSS. hereto annexed. 


INTRODUCTION. 43 


hundred lines. "The vanity of dedicating the poem 
to Charlemagne, the allusion to the victory at 
Roncevaux, and the medical learning displayed in 
it, prove it to have been the work of some French 
physician. "There are copies in the Ashmolean, and 
Bodleian libraries; from which the following ex- 
tracts will fully describe their character and con- 
tents. They are headed— 


Alter usus versuum Salernitanorum. Incipiunt versus 
medicinales editi à magistris et doctoribus Salernitanis 
in Apulià, scripti Karolo magno Francorum Regi glorio- 
sissimo. Quorum opusculum in quinque partes dividitur. 
Quarum prima est de rebus homini naturalibus. Secunda, 
de rebus homini non naturalibus. Tertia, de rebus contra 
hominis naturam (i. e. diseases). Quaría, de medicinis 
simplicibus et compositis. Quinta de curis egritadinum. 


The plants and other simple medicines, are ar- 
ranged alphabetically. 
Incipit primo prologus. 
Francorum Regi scripsit tota Schola Salerni, 
In metro pauca, mox commemorantia multa, 
Quo phisis regimine stanti compendio scitur, 
Cura subest prompta, languor quà tollitur eger. 
Metra juvant animos, comprendunt plurima paucis, 
Pristina commemorant, quz sunt tibi grata legenti. 
Hzc bene servando vitam longam tibi mando. 
Herbas in terris, celo quot sidera cernis, 
A me tot mille verba salutis habe. 


44 INTRODUCTION. 


At the end, after the epilogue: 


Explicit florarium versuum  medicinalium, scriptum 
Christianissimo Regi Francorum, Carolo magno, à totà 
universitate doctorum medicinarum preclarissimi studii 
Salernitani, tempore quo idem Rex Saracenos devicit in 
Runcivalle, quod latuit usque, tarde, et Deo volente, 
nuper prodiit in lucem. 


A few specimens may be sufficient: 


De locis purgandi humores. 


Sanguis per venas purgatur, flegma veretro, 
Fel per sudores, sed melancholia retro. 


De signis mortalibus in acutá febri. 


Virtus pulmonis, cordis, stomachi, cadit, hzret. 
Anxius insanit, sudatque, cruore fluente, 
Absque crisi riget, et febris auget, et absens. 
Est sitis, osque sonat, plorat, decoctio cessat. 
Livor in extremis apparet, fronte citriná, 

Est urina minor, egestio cruda liquescit. 

Certius est signum contractio testiculorum. 

Aut si retrahitur in veretro virga virilis. 

Haec sunt signa quibus inspectio mortis habetur. 


Whatever be the history of it, the whole of the 
poem upon the choice of simples and medicines by 
Otho Cremonensis is incorporated into it, under the 


INTRODUCTION. 45 


title De Simplicibus Medicinis, in alphabetical 
order, in which is likewise included all of the Schola 
Salernitana which relates to the same subject: as, 
from Otho: 

Asa Fetida. 


Quo magis feetorem facit Asa scias meliorem, 


De Borace. 


S1 tibi veracem mens est novisse Boracem, 
Elige candentum, duram, sine sorde nitentem. 


De Coloquintidá. 


Non resonans mota, per pulpam candida tota, 

Si pulpis hzeret semen, si firma cohzret 

Seminibus pulpa, coloquintida sit sine culpà. 
LÀ 


From the fifth part, de curis morborum, I select 
two short heads: 
De satisfactione appetitüs cgroti. 


Qu:e petit zegrotans, quamvis contraria, dentur: 
Tunc natura viget potius cum vota replentur. 


Contra Squinonciam. 
Quando dolet guttur, velut ulcera si patiatur, 


Protinüs abstineas, minuas9?; sic alleviatur. 


963 Bleed. 


46 INTRODUCTION. 


The following prudential advice enters too deeply 
into the mysteries of the profession to have been 
designed for the use of the profane: 


De prudentiá Medici sumentis pro labore. 


Non didici gratis, nec sagax Musa Hippocratis 
JEgris in stratis serviet absque datis. 

Sumpta solet caré multum medicina juvare, 

Si qu: datur gratis nil habet utilitatis. 

Rees dare pro rebus, pro verbis verba solemus. 
Pro vanis verbis montanis utimur herbis, 

Pro caris rebus, pigmentis et speciebus. 

Est medicinalis medicis data regula talis : 

Ut dicatur, da, da, dum profert languidus, ha, ha. 
Da medicis primo medium, medio, nihil imo. 
Dum dolet infirmus medicus sit pignore firmus. 
Instantér quaere nummos, ut pignus, habere. 
Fedus et antiquum conservat pignus amicum, 
Nam si post quzris quzrens semper eris *. 


In the epilogue he speaks of the medical authors 
of Salerno: 


Maurus, Mattheus Salomon, Petrus Urso, moderni 
Sunt medici, per quos regnat medicina Salerni. 


$* Ahter, injuriosus haberis. 
5» See an account of the particular MSS. in the catalogue 
hereafter given. 


INTRODUCTION. 47 


Of the additions which have been gradually en. 
grafted upon the original poem, it is not difficult to 
trace the origin and progress. 

rinST. Villa Nova had introduced many verses of 
a similar nature into his commentary, not as parts of 
ihe poem, but professedly from other quarters, and 
which he carefully distinguished by such prefatory 
words as, u£ dicunt, juxta illud. metricum, or undé 
versus isli communes. These lines, to the number 
of near forty, found their way early into the text, 
and became part of the usual copies, the editio 
recepta. 

SECONDLY. 'lhe next storehouse for supplying 
additions was the poem of Macer, from which much 
of the original had been taken. 

THIRDLY. Besides these, many floating verses, 
some written as marginal notes, were occasionally 
absorbed and embodied, an! other. were purposely 
added by monks and transcribers. 

FOURTHLY. Át length it was completely altered 
and reformed, in substance and method, fully to 
meet the ideas of the learned. ^ Every subject 
which was deficient was supplied, those parts which - 
were too short were extended, and it was trans- 
formed into a complete compendium of the whole 
art of medicine. 

Since near two hundred years had elapsed between. 


48 INTRODUCTION. 


the composition of the poem and the time of Villa 
Nova, it is not improbable that some alterations had 
been made in the intermediate period, and that even 
his text is not immaculate. Perhaps it was origi- 
nally very short, not much more than the general 
precepts. An attentive examination would lead one 
to imagine that some verses had been altered, or 
added. Lines where there is a change of person, or 
number; verses which do not rhyme, or which are. 
not in the hexameter form: all repetitions of the 
same rule in other words: or rules which seem to 
be in the nature of explanations or comments: lines 
out of place, and separated from others on the same 
subject: all these may perhaps be suspected of being 
supposititious, but what sacrilegious hand will ven- 
ture to displace them from a situation which they 
have maintained for five hundred years! 

Although many of the general rules are excellent, 
and adapted to all times and persons, yet much of 
the detail is founded upon systems which are ex- 
ploded by modern experience. "l'he object, there- 
fore, of every intelligent reader of this poem is not 
to learn the art of medicine, but to contemplate a 
venerable monument of antiquity ; and to ascertain 
the opinions in the medical science, which prevailed 
in the eleventh century. Ie wishes therefore to see 
it in its original simplicity, in the precise state in 


INTRODUCTION. 49 


which it was sent to the king of England, and free 
from any subsequent additions. 

This original text, if anywhere, is to be found in 
the edition which received the stamp of authenticity 
from Arnaldus de Villà Novà, by whom it was pub- 
lished and commented upon, and from the additional 
approbation of the doctors of the university of Mont- 
pelier. "Villa Nova lived as early as the thirteenth 
century. He was resident in the kingdom of Sicily, 
where the poem was written, and of course had the 
best opportunity of obtaining a correct copy.  '"l'his 
commentary was written to flatter the national pre- 
judices of his protector Frederie, who was justly 
proud of a composition so honourable to his country. 
It is not probable, therefore, that he should have 
mutilated, or curtailed the original work, as has 
been supposed by some critics 9, for which he could 
have no assignable motive. Neither was he a care- 
less, or uncritical, editor: he sometimes quotes 
various readings, and always distinguishes between 
the text itself, and other verses which he introduces 
into his commentary. 

Under all these considerations, I have adopted 
the text as it was settled by Villa Nova, and as it is 


$6 Murat, Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. col. 935. Schola Salernitana 
fortassis olim auctior quam nunc in editis conspicitur. 
F 


50 INTRODUCTION. 


to be found in the earliest printed editions. For 
this purpose I have used that printed at Strasburg 
in 1491, collated with six others of the fifteenth cen- 
tury: viz. two small quartos without name or date, 
perhaps earlier ; one in duodecimo printed by 
Regnault Chandieu ; one by John de Westphalia ; 
another by Balligault in 1493, and one by Michael le 
Noir in 1497. I have not seen what has been stated 
to be the earliest edition of 1480, if that is not a mis- 
take, arising from the date of the approbation of the 
sages of Montpelier. All those of the fifteenth cen- 
tury which I have seen, and probably any others, 
are mere reprints of each other, with no other varia- 
tions than errors of the press. I have, however, re- 
formed the orthography and corrected the evident 
blunders of one edition by another 97. 

After the poem itself I have printed a splgetion 
from the additional lines. 


VII. IMITATIONS. 
The Regimen Salutis being so popular, many books 
were written under similar titles. "lhe universities 


of Paris and Montpelier are said to have produced 


97 See the catalogue of printed editions. 


INTRODUCTION. 5] 


poems in imitation of it 99. In the year 1477 was 
printed, Pulcherrimum et utilissimum opus ad sani- 
tatis conservationem, in prose, and in alphabetical 
order, by Benedict de Nursia, physician to Francis 
Sforza, duke of Milan, dedicated to pope Nicholas 
the fifth. "There is a small treatise of only seven 
leaves by '"Thaddeus de Florentià, entitled De re- 
gimine salutis secundum quatuor partes anni. He 
flourished about 1280. At the end is a colophon— 
Opera et industria Dominici de Lapis, impendio 
tamen Sigismundi à Libris civis atque librarii Bono- 
niensis. 

I have before mentioned that Magninus, or May- 
nus, a physician of Milan, having made some altera- 
tions in Villa Nova's treatise De Regimine Salutis, 
claimed the work as his own. It was printed very 
early in his name: as at Louvain by John de West- 
phalia in 1482, and in 1486. At Paris by Udeline 
Gering in 14983, at Basil by Nicholas Kesler in 
1493, and often subsequently. 

Before the Schola Salerni were many ancient 
poems upon medical subjects. In Greek there were 
Nicander, Rufus Ephesius, and Marcellus Sidetes. 
In Latin, Serenus Sammonicus, Fannius Palemon, 


$8 Fabric. Bib. Lat. vol. iii. lib. iv. cap. xii. Schenk. Bib. 
Med. 


59 INTRODUCTION. 


and the spurious Macer. In imitation of these and 
the Schola Salerni, verse was adopted as a conve- 
nient vehicle for medical science. In later times 
the work of Eobanus Hesse, De tuendáà boná vale- 
tudine, and the Ceena Baptist: Frire Mantuani, are 
classical poems and have been often printed 9". 
JEgidius Corboliensis is an author of the twelfth 
century, who requires a more particular detail, as his 
;work upon compound medicines throws a consider- 
able light upon the state of Salerno about the period 
of the Schola Salerni, and has supplied many mate- 
rials for this introduction ?. For his history I think 
we have little which can be depended upon beyond 
the internal evidence of his poem. — He states that 


9 As in Jo. Sigismundi Henninger's Quadriga Scriptorum 
Diasteticorum. 

7! From the similarity of the name, this author has been 
confounded with an /Egidius Atheniensis, who is said to have 
flourished in 700, and wrote two poetical works, De Pulsibus 
et Urinis. Trithemius de Script. Eccl. No. 241. — Hendreich, 
Pandect. Brandenburg. p. 44, 45. And with Johannes ZEgidius, 
or of saint Giles's, an Englishman, whose history is to be found 
in Matthew Paris, ed. Watts, 1640, p. 414, 874, 974. Leland, 
De Script. Brit. p. 251.  Fuller's Worthies, p. 493. From 
these in Pegge's Life of Grosseteste. Saxii Onomast. vol. ii. 
p.268. Chalmer's Biog. Dict. etc. Leyser's account is very 
confused, p. 499. 


INTRODUCTION. 53 


he studied physic at Salerno, under Peter Musandi- 
nus, Maurus, and Matthew Salomon, who were 
eminent physicians in the twelfth century ",, and he 
describes that place with elegance and affection ^. 
His work is dedicated to Romoaldus, who was arch- 
bishop of Salerno from 1157 to his death in 1181 75, 
and he speaks of having written it long before, and 
at Paris 74. 

JEgidius Parisiensis, in a poem in honour of Char- 
lemagne, written in the popedom of Coelertine the 
second, between the years 1191 and 1198, speaks of 
him as a contemporary, then highly celebrated for 
his skill in medicine and poetry, and as having been 
born at Paris?*. In a description of the hospital at 
Corbeil, his name is said to have been Peter, and 
that he was of the family of the counts of Corbeil 76. 

This work of /Egidius Corboliensis is on the 
Virtues and Praises of Compound Medicines, and is a 
poem in hexameter verse, consisting of four thousand 


7! Lib. i. ver. 93, 98, 107; p. 509. line 145. ; p. 510. lib. ii. 
line 1, 28, 31. 

7? Lib. in. line 465, etc. p. 593. 

73 Lib. i. line 130, etc. p. 510. 

7* Lib. i, etc. p. 506. 

7$ In Carolino. lib. v. In Duchesne, Hist. Franc. Script, 
vol. v. p. 323. 

76 By Petit, in Journal de Medicine for September, 1786. 

F3 


54 INTRODUCTION. 


five hundred and sixty-two lines. It was printed 
by Leyser, from a manuscript in the Wolfenbuttel 
library, but with many errors77. And it professes 
to be an exposition of the Antidotarium of Nicholaus, 
and the commentary of Platearius upon it7?. It is 
in four books, with a prologue to each, and what he 
styles prologus finalis at the end. Above seventy 
medicines are treated of, in alphabetical order. 
Without stating the materials of which they are 
composed, he describes their various virtues, the 
cases and circumstances in which they are applicable, 
the dose, the mode of giving them, and whether 
alone or in composition with other medicines, and he 
concludes each article with the information of how 
long it will keep good. "l'he recipés for the medicines 
themselves are to be found in his original authors, 
Nicholaus, and Platearius: and in Myrepsius de 
Compositis Medicaminibus, and Actuarius, on the 
same subjects. "lhey are mostly very complex, and 
the ingredients are frequently very costly: as diamar- 


7/ Liber de Virtutibus et Laudibus Compositorum Medicami- 
num, metricé compositus, editus à Magistro Z:gidio Corboilensi 
—In Leyser's Historia poetarum et poematum Medi ZEvi. 
Hale, 1721, p. 500. 

78 Antidotarium Nicholai, cum expositione Jo. Platearii, was 
printed, with the works of Mesua, at Venice in 1589. It is 
alphabetical. 


.INTRODUCTION. 55 


gariton, composed of pearls dissolved, and the pecu- 
niary value was supposed to enhance their virtue 
and efficacy. "There are many digressions, in which 
the author takes the opportunity of expatiating 
freely upon other subjects, but mostly relating to 
the medical profession, and they are the best parts 
of the poem ; of which the following are the prin- 
cipal: : 

In book the first, upon medicines which cure so 
quiekly, that they deprive the physician of due 
honour and fees 79. 

In £he second book, under the head of Diamar- 
gariton, he proves that though the poor are unable 
to afford such expensive compositions, they have the 
consolation that poverty is the best medicine, and 
preserver of health 9. Under Diasatyrion is a discus- 
sion upon love?.. Another against the use of honey, 
and fraudulent apothecaries *?. 

In book the third, are contained observations upon 
the utility of the pains of labour? "The praises 
and description of Salerno?'. Advice that young 
and inexperienced physicians are to be avoided, and 


79 Lib. i. ver. 698. p. 531. 

: 8 Tib. ii. ver. 68. p. 540. and lib. iii. ver. 235. p. 583. 
8! Tib. ii. ver. 218. p. 546. $2? Ver. 894. p. 572. 
83 Lib. iii, ver. 101. p. 577. 84 Ver, 469. p. 593. 


56 INTRODUCTION. 


the description of a good physicsan??. "The circum- 
stances of cases should be inquired into 99. ^ Various 
sorts of madness are described 9/. 

In book the fourth, is a dissertation on the virtues 
of the number four ; and an apology that the neces- 
sity of metre had compelled him to distort many 
Greek terms. A knotty question is discussed, why 
pills are always given in an odd number??, Under 
opiates he satirizes with some humour one HRigor- 
dus, an empiric, 

Qui requiem monachis in acutis febribus offert, 
Et requiem facit :eternam 9?, 








The description of a monstrous child, censure of 
Montpelier?, prudential hints to physicians,artifices 
to be used, medicines to be changed in colour and 
form, and disguised, as patients love variety, and 
despise cheap medicines?l. In the prologus finalis, he 
gives good advice to young practitioners about fees, 
and that they should b/eed the purses of the rich to 
aid the poor? Hie advises them not to make any 


85 Ver. 564. p. 597. 

86 Ver. 848. p. 610. and lib. iv. ver. 309. p. 639. 

8 Ver. 866. p. 610. 58 Dib. iv. ver. 129. p. 632. 
8 Ver. 386. p. 646. 

90 Ver. 564. p. 654. and ver. 639. p. 657. 

91 Ver. 1119. p. 675. 9? Ver. 1049. p. 687. 


INTRODUCTION. 57 


agreement beforehand with great people, since, if 
they are generous, they will reward amply, and, 
if avaricious, their name will advance them. . With 
middling people to make a previous agreement, 
because when they are in pain they are disposed to 
reward a physician, but when they recover they 
grudge the fees. 

Though so near in time to the Schola Salerni, it 
is far beyond it in classical and poetical language. 
It is remarkable thatit does not mention John de 
Milano, but many Leonine verses are introduced, 
particularly at the beginning of each article, in 
imitation of the Schola Salerni. 

The following lines allude to it. Speaking of 
some roots, herbs, gums, and seeds, he adds, 


Quorum facunda Salerni 
Pagina describit 9?. 





In censuring the physicians of Montpelier, he 
says, referring probably to their imitations of that 
poem, 


Quos gula, quos stimulat et cogit avara dolosi 
Ambitio nummi carmen ructare Salernum? 


Other passages are directly copied from it. 


?3 Lib. i. ver. 834. p. 536. 95 Lib. i. ver. 639. p. 657. 


58 INTRODUCTION. 
The Schola says of the nettle: 
Omnibus et morbis subvenit articulorum 95. 


/Egidius, of benedicta : 


Dissolvit lapidem, morbum fugit articulorum 99. 
The Schola of mustum, or new wine: 

Hepatis emphraxim, splenem generat lapidemque?'. 
ZEgidius, of benedicta : 

Amputat enfraxes epatis, splenique tumores 5, 


The Schola: 


Si fluat ad pectus dicatur rheuma catarrhus. 
Ad fauces brancus, ad nares esto coryza ?. 


ZEgidius, of diaprasium: 
Corizam, brancum, tussim domat, atque catarrhum !. 


The Schola, of sage: 


Salvia, salvatrix, nature consiliatrix ?. 


95 Sch. Sal. ver. 202. 96 Lib. i. ver. 828. p. 536. 
"eSehosal vendit. 98 Lib. i. ver. 830. p. 536. 
99 Sch. Sal. ver. 248. ! Lib. ii. ver. 349, p. 551. 


2? Sch. Sal. ver. 183. 


INTRODUCTION. 59 
ZEgidius, of sotira. 


Sotira, salvatrix, nature conciliatrix ?. 


From the additions to the Schola: 


Pone gule metas, ut sit tibi longior ctas *. 
JEgidius, of sotira: 


Vim chronicis morbis, quos fundat largior tas, 
Ingerit, et propriüs compellat stringere metas ?. 


Again of diaciminum : 











Intraque duorum 
Annorum metas ipsius clauditus setas 9. 


As the book where it is to be found is scarce, 
and as few persons I suppose will read so long and 
tedious a poem, I shall proceed to give a few speci- 
mens. It begins, alluding to his having kept the 
poem long by him, 


Prologus. 


Quse secreta diu noctis latuere sub umbrá 
Clausa, verecundi signo celata pudoris, 


3 Lib.iv. ver. 438. p. 649. — * Additions, line 40. 
* Lib. iv. ver. 466. p. 650. $ Lib. ii. ver. 440, p. 555. 


60 


INTRODUCTION. 


Gesta sub involucris mentis, clarescere quzrunt. 
Eruta de tenebris cupiunt sub luce videri. 

Tecta patent : obscura nitent: scintillaque mentis 
Fulgurat, accenditque novum fax ignea vatem. 
De tepidà concepta priüs, tenuique favillà 

Jam larg? rutilos emittit lampadis ignes. 
Provehitur seges in culmum, fecundaque multo 
Ordine granorum canis albescit aristis, 
Granaque prosiliunt studii concussa flagello. 
Vinea turgescit botris, jam palmes adultus 
Germinat, et sterili vindemia pendet in ulmo. 


After fifteen more lines, in which he apologizes 


for the rudeness of his verse, he proceeds to invoke 
the muse: 


Inter Cirrhzas Dea plus celebranda sorores, 
Parnassi bijugo nutrita cacumine montis, 
Lauro nexa comas, vultüs pallore decenti, 
Et facie macrà famulam confessa Minerve, 
Ex Helicone suo migrans, in pectoris alti 
Transmeat occultos non invitata recessus : 


Afterwards he addresses his poem : 


Vade liber felix. Nam cum provectior etas 
Jam tua sit, densisque habeas pubescere plumis, 
Dedecus esse potest puerili incumbere nido, 

Et cunas colere balbis infantibus aptas. 

I, cave ne titubes, firmo vestigia gressu 

Dirige, cum rectis habeas procedere talis, 


INTRODUCTION. . 61 


Et quz delicti preco solet esse, pudoris 
Nulla tibi teneras suffundat purpura vultus. 


*. 


He speaks thus of his masters: 


Tibi defensacula ponet 

Musandinus apex, quo tanquam sole nitenti 
Et nitet, et nituit illustris fama Salerni. 
Cujus si fuerit resolutum funere corpus, 
Spiritus exultat, et magni pectora Mauri 
Tota replet. Maurus redimit damnumque rependit, 
Prima quod in Petro passa est, et perdidit ctas. 
Qui tanquam nanus, humeris colloque gigantis 
Desuper incumbens, ipso fortasse tuetur 
Longius, et summo superaddit culmina monti. 
O utinam Musandinus nunc viveret auctor! 
Ille meos versus digno celebraret honore— 
Ille meis scriptis signum punctumque favoris 
Imprimeret, placido legeret mea carmina vultu, 
Et, quod in irriguis illius creverat hortis, 
Ipse meum sentiret olus, gustuque probaret 
Ex proprio sale doctrinz traxisse saporem, 
Suppliat et Petri Maurus mihi damna reformet. 
Pastor ovem, membrumque caput, famulumque patronus, 
Doctor discipulum, noscat sua mater alumnum. 
Vellem quod medicz doctor Platerius artis 
Munere divino vitales carperet auras, 
Ganderet metricis pedibus sua scripta ligari, 
Et numeris parere meis— 

Urso suum te concivem gaudebit adesse, 

G 


69 INTRODUCTION. 


Strenuus ambiguos causarum solvere nodos— 

Mente bonà mea Castalius decreta Johannes 
Suscipiat, quem, dum pueriles volveret annos, 
Myrtum humilem Musandino sub preside vidi. 
Audio nunc ipsum summis contendere lauris, 

Et sua nobilibus zequasse cacumina cedris. 

Hos, physice antistes, quos /Egidiana libellos 
sanctio produxit, digno Romoaldus honore 
Consecret et celebret— 

Ipse novo faveat operi, nec Parisianas 
JEstimet indignum physicam resonare Camznas.— 

Qui trahit a docto nomen Salomone Matthzus, 
Qui nitet eloquio, qui mentis acumine pollet, 
Suscipiat placido Salomon mea carmina vultu; 
Et se noscat in his, sua condimenta saporet— 
Quo Pessulanus nisi Mons authore niteret, 
Jamdudum physice lux eclipsata fuisset— 

Richardas senior, quem plus setate senili 
Ars facit esse senem— 

Sit judex operis placidus— 


Most of the articles begin with rhyming verses ; 
as under the head of Electuarium Dulcis: 


Ex algore satus, stomachi dolor ante profatus, 
Sollicitare latus ventosi turbine flatus, 
Quamvis iratus, quamvis ad bella paratus, 


7 Lib. ii. ver. 286. p. 585. sic. 


INTRODUCTION. 63 


Hoc semel afflatus sedat poenam cruciatus. 
Jejuno stomacho potabitur addita Baccho, 
Nux ubi muscata decocta sit et macerata 
Enfraxes aperit.— 


Of his manner of treating his subject I give two 
articles as some of the shortest : 


Unguentum aureum. 
Quod trahit ex auro nomen, quo przvalet auro, 
Unguentum, renes lapidosos curat inunctum. 
Solvit dura, vias reserat, resolutaque purgat 
Sewpius appositum, vicibus crebris renovatum. 
Omnia de gelidis mala discutit insita causis. 
Militat in morbis, et regnat quatuor annis ?. 


Unguentum album. 


Omnis ab unguento scabies detergitur albo, 
Quam generet salsus infecti fleumatis humor ?. 


The description of Salerno relates to the subject 
of this introduction : 


——— Terra Salerni. 

Urbs Phoebo sacrata, Minerve sedula nutrix, 
Fons physicz, pugil eucrasiz, cultrix medicinz, 
Assecla nature, vitx: paranympha, salutis 








$ Lib. iv. ver. 1081. p. 674, 
9 Lib. iv. ver. 1224. 


64 INTRODUCTION. 


Pronuba fida, magis Lachesis soror, Atropos hostis, 
. Morbi pernicies, gravis adversaria mortis. 

Quse quia perpetuum gessit cum morte duellum, 
Nec segnem sine Marte potest deducere vitam ; 
Ut sibi materiam certaminis atque laboris 
Vendicet, et nullo pacis torpore quiescat : 
Lethiferà regione sedet, sub sole calenti, 
Rupibus astriferis celsum coloque propinquum, 
Audaci nimirüm scandentibus eethera dorso. 
Arcet et excludit gelidi spiramina venti 
Castigata situ: pendens de colle supino 
Incumbit pelago, sua quod muralia radit. 
Extantesque domos ludentibus assilit undis. 
Montibus excelsis retró clipeata vapores, 

Et nebulas pingues, et solum combibit austrum, 
Foedaque corrupti carpit contagia coeli. 

Sed medicinarum sibi quas montana ministrant. 
Urbs jaculis armata viget, cum morte potenter 
Dimicat, extirpat morbos, et fata retundit, 
Naturam relevat, et stamina rupta renodat. 
Morte (mortis) regna premit, cum quà componere quamvis 
Non valeat, petit inducias, et protrahit zeevum, 
Et quz non aufert ventura pericula differt. 

Que nisi tam feecunda foret, tantisque vigeret 
Consiliis, illam physicz nisi Delphicus artis 
Spiritus implueret, absorptà voragine mortis, 
Nec cursum bul/ire valens, miseranda periret '?. 


!? Ljb. iii, ver. 469. p. 593. 


INTRODUCTION. 65 


I cannot refrain from making one more quotation. 
After stating that Diamargariton 1s so expensive a 
medicine that the rich only can afford to take it, he 
proceeds : 


Quid faciet Codrus? Quid Codri curta suppellex ? 
Cujus plebe&à vacuus farragine venter 

Non satis impletur, spasmum patiente crumená, 
Cujus opes modicis depicta sophismata cartis. 
An quia res angusta domi, quia parca facultas, 
Et tenuis sumptus, nequit hos attingere luxus ? 
Et vetat in vetitum motus erumpere mentis, 
Nuda salus sine subsidio prostrata jacebit ? 

Àn quia deficiunt species, et aromata desunt, 
Codrizat tua, Codre, salus, dejecta fatiscit 
Corporis integritas, quia te presentia Mauri 
Splendida non recreat multo spectabilis auro ? 
Absit ut insidias naturz sobria ponat 
Mundaque paupertas, quse, certis obsita metis, 
Non quaerit sibi prescriptos transcendere fines! 
Paupertas Medicina sibi tribus empta minutis, 
Quam faba Pythagorz, lardo condita pusillo, - 
Et rude nutrit olus, cui de farragine panis 
Furfureà factus, avidoque in ventre receptus, 
Radit, et elimat grossos de corpore chymos—(xvpovc). 
Plus sapit, et reficit, nutrit, confortat, et auget, 
Se membris magis assimulat, se firmiüs illis 
Inserit esca, famis avido condita sapore. 

Qu: via curandi morbos, quz causa fidelis 


G3 


66 INTRODUCTION. 


Certa medela malis, nisi parce sobria vitse 
Regula, privatis plerumque accommoda mensis ? 
Plus aqua, plus tenuis sub tecto paupere victus, 
Roboris et vitz confert, quam Cesaris aula, 
Nectarii calices, quam vitis vina Falernz, 

Quam caro sylvestris latrantum parta labore, 
Salmones sapidi, rhombi, trutzeeque rubentes, 
Inter regales epulas, tapetaque crassa. 

Lanquet in hic gula luxurians, et venter obesus !!, 


I! p. 541. 1. 91. 


A CATALOGUE 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS 


OF THE 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Those which I have seen and collated are marked with an asterisk. 
They may be divided into nine classes. 


. ]. The Regimen, with Arnaldus de Villà Novà's com- 

mentary in its original state, and printed separately. 

2. The editions of Villa Nova's works, in which the Regimen 
and commentary are introduced. 

3. The Regimen, with Villa Nova's commentary, corrected 
and improved by Curio and Crellius. 

4. As farther altered and perfected by Curio. 

5. The editions by Moreau, which have Curio's commentary, 
with Moreau's animadversions. 

6. The editions by Zacharius Sylvius, which have only 
Curio's commentary. 

7. The editions of the usual text only without the com- 
mentary. 

8. Editions without the commentary, in which the text is 
altered. 

9. Translations. 


68 .A4 CATALOGUE OF 


I. THE REGIMEN, WITH ARNALDUS DE VILLA 
NOVA'S COMMENTARY IN ITS ORIGINAL 
STATE. 


PRINTED IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY. 


1480. The first edition was printed at Montpeler in this year. 
It is entitled, Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum à Ma- 
gistro Arnaldo de Villà Novà Catalano veraciter ex- 
positum, ac novitér correctum et emendatum, per 
Doctores Montispessulani regentes, anno 1480, pra- 
dicto loco actu moram trahentes. It is in quarto, has 
the signatures as far as five, and each page has thirty- 
four lines. 

Bnuwzr, Manuel du Libraire, tom. iii. p. 541. 

——— Venice, by Bernard de Vitalibus, 4to. cum expositione 
Arnaldi de Villa Nova Cathelani. Pawzrn. 

—— Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum à Magistro Arnaldo de 
Villà Novà Cathalano veracitér expositum ac novitér 
correctum et emendatum per Doctores Montispessulani 
expositum, anno 1480. In fine, à morte subito nos 
defendat qui eternalitér vivit et regnat, amen. No 
name orplace. Pawzrm. 

—— A small quarto in Gothic letters, without name, place, 
or date, with the commentary. The initial letter A is 
written, and it is not paged. It begins, Incipit liber 
De Conservatione Corporis, seu De Regimine Sanitatis, 
compositum per Magistrum Arnaldum de Villa Nova. 
At the end is Villa Nova's treatise De Conservatione 
Corporis, seu Regimen Sanitatis. * In the British 
Museum. There are two copies of it. 


1480 


1490. 
1491. 


———— 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 69 


In duodecimo, by Regnault Chaudiere, Gothic letters, 
with the commentary. * British Museum. 

A small quarto, in Gothic letters, with the commentary. 
At the end, Explicit Regimen Sanitatis compositum 
seu ordinatum à Magistro Arnoldo de Villà Novà 
Cathalano, omnium medicorum viventium gemmá. 
Impressum Lovanii in domo Magistri Johannis de 
Westphalià. At the end Villa Nova's treatise De Con- 
servatione Corporis. * "This is perhaps the oldest edi- 
ton. British Museum. 

Lugduni, in 4to. HarrreR. Ackrnuaw. 

Schole Salernitanzm de conservandà valetudine opus- 
culum, cum enarrationibus Arnaldi de Villà Novà. 
Pise, 4to. PawzER. 

Paris, 4to. HarrEeR. AckERMAN. 

Montpeli, 4to. HarrER. AcksaMAN. 

Venice, by John de Forvilio, fol. ScsvsrER. AckERMAN. 

Regimen Sauitatis, cum expositione Magistri Arnaldi de 
Villà Novà. 

Incipit Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum excellentissimum 
pro conservatione sanitatis totius humani generis peru- 
tilisimum : nec non à Magistro Arnoldo de Villà 
Novà Cathelano, omnium medicorum viventium gemmá, 
utilitér, ac secundum omnium antiquorum medicorum 
doctrinam veracitér expositum : novitér correctum ac 
emendatum per egregissimos ac medicins artis pe- 
ritissimos Doctores Montispessulani regentes, anno 
McCccccLxxx, predicto loco actu moram trahentes. 

At the end, 

Hoc opus optatur quod flos medicinz vocatur. 


Tractatus qui de Regimine Sanitatis nuncupatur finit 


710 A CATALOGUE OF 


felicitér, impressus Argen: (Strasburg) : anno Domini 
M Cccc xcr, in die Sancti Thome Cantuariensis. Apud 
Ines 

The text in this edition is taken from this edition, with 
some corrections from other editions of this century. 

1493. Paris, per Magistrum Andream Bocard, 4to. 

Bibliotheca Britannica. 

——- Paris, 4to. Gothic letters, per Felicem Dalligault. The 
printer's name in a cipher in the title page. — The first 
letter A is written. British Museum. * 

1494. Regimen Sanitatis Metricé, cum commentariis Arnaldi. 
Colonie. PawzEn. 

1497. Paris, 4to. printed by Michael le Noir. His cipher in 
the title page, with a crest, a blackamoor's head on a 
helmet, with a coronet, and this motto: C'est mon 
desir, de Dieu servir, pour acquerir son doulx plasir. * 

British Museum. 

1499, Schola Salernitana, seu Doctorum Parisiensium tractatu- 
lus medicinalis ad Regem Anglies Argentine per 
Mattheam Hussfuf. PawzseR. 

It does not appear whether this has the commentary, or 
the text unaltered. 

—— Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum, nec non et liber de 
conservatione corporis Magistri Arnoldi de Villà Novà. 
Sine nomine, loco, et anno. Fortassis Colonie apud 
Ulr. Zell. Pawzrmn. 

—— Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum à Magistro Arnaldo de 
Villa Nova expositum circa annum 1480. Without. 
place, name, or year. Pawzrm. 

—— Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum. In fine explicit re- 
gimen sanitatis compositum seu ordinatum à Magistro 


1502. 


1503. 
1505. 
1507. 
1409. 
15138. 


1514. 


1519. 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 71 


Arnaldo de Villa Nova Cathologo omnium viventium 
medicorum viventium gemmà. Without name, place, 
or date!, PaNzER. 


PRINTED IN THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY. 


Strasburg, per Matthiam Brant, 4to. Gothic letters. 
BnuwzT. 
About the beginning of this century was published in 
quarto, in black letter, Le tresor des poures selon, 
Maistre Arnaudt de Ville Nove, et Maistre Girard de 
Sollo, Docteur in Medicine de Montpellier, translate du 
Latin en Frangois pour l'amour de Dieu. "The first is 
a translation of Villa Nova's Treatise de Regimiue 
Sanitatis. 
Argentorati, per John Prüs, 4to. ScnuusrEn. 
Paris, per R. Ledru, 4to. Bnuwzr. 
Colonie, per Cornelium de Zyryckzee. Pawzkn. 
Liptzk, per Melchiorem Lotter. Pawzzn. 
Bonz valetudinis cura, seu Regimen Sanitatis Saler- 
nitanum.  Liptzk per Johan Thanner. PawzrR. 
Lugduni, per Gibertum Villiers, folio. 
SCHUSTER. ACKERMAN. 


Nurembergz per Jodoc Gutknecht. Pawzrn. 


.! Some of the editions without name, place, or date, are 
probably duplicates, but they are not sufficiently described to 
ascertain this point. 


72 A CATALOGUE OF 


II. EDITIONS OF THE WORKS OF ARNALDUS 
DE VILLA NOVA, CONTAINING THE REGIMEN 
SANITATIS, AND COMMENTARY. 


1504. The first edition of his works collected was printed 

Lugduni, apud Magistrum Guil. Hugon, in folio. 
GzSNER. 

1505. Venice, folio, per Bonetum Locatellum. Editor Thomas 
Murchius. Impendio horedum Octaviani Scoti, civis 
Modoetiensis. 

1509. Lugduni, à Francisco Fradin. "The same. 

1509. Paris. 

1514. Venice. 

1520. Lugduni. 

1527. Impensis heredum Domini Octaviani Scoti civis Modo- 
etiensis, ac sociorum. Venice. Additis quatuor trac- 
tatibus. j , 

1532. In folio. Harrrn. 

1585. Cum Nicholai Taurelli annotationibus. Basil. 

1686. Lugduni. * 


III. THE REGIMEN, WITH VILLA NOVA'S COM- 
MENTARY, CORRECTED BY CURIO AND 
CRELLIUS. 


1538. Conservandz sanitatis precepta saluberrima cum Arnaldi 
Villanovani exegesi per Johannem Curionem locuple- 
tata, ut novum opus videri possit. Francofurti, in 
12mo. HarrrR. 


1545. 


1552. 


1553. 


1554. 
1555. 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 13 


De conservandà bonà valetudine, opusculum Scholz 
Salernitane ad Regem Angliw versibus conscriptum, 
cum Arnoldi Novicomensis, Medici et Philosophi 
celeberrimi, brevissimis et utilissimis enarrationibus. Et 
hzc omnia a barbarie, et infinitis, quibus scatebant, 
mendis, tam accurate repurgata, ut jam quasi novam 
faciem induerint, citraque offensionem legi possent. 
Opera et studio Johannis Curionis et Jacobi Crelli. 
Francofurti, apud Christianum Egenolphum, 8vo. with 
wooden cuts.  ÁCKERMANN. 


. The same, 12mo. MarrTrArnE. 


The same, 12mo. at Paris. Cat. Bib. Grypesw. Acx. 


. Francofurti, cum Johanni Katschei de Regimine Sani- 


tatis, 12mo. HarrER. 


. De conservandà bonà valetudine, opera Jo. Curionis et 


Jac. Crellii. Francof. apud Chr. Egenolphum. Dedi- 
cated to Picus, abbot of St. Peter's monastery at 
Erford. Dedication dated in 1545. Wooden cuts. 
No translation, — At the end, Rhythmi M. Ottonis 
Cremonensis de. electione meliorum simplicium ac spe- 
ciorum medicinalium. * British Museum. 

Otto begins :— 


Est aloes lignum melius sit hoc tibi signum 
Quod nigredo parum dat fragili subamarum. 


Lipsie, 8vo. addita versione Germanicà. 
Fabric. Bibl. Lat. vol. iii. cap. xii. p. 994. 
Francof. apud Chr. Egenolph. The same as that of 
1551.* British Museum. 
Francof. 8vo. Bibl. Traj. Bat. p. 113. 
Paris, apud Juven. in 12mo. Marrrainr. 


H 


44 A CATALOGUE OF 


IV. THE REGIMEN WITH VILLA NOVA'S COM- 
MENTARY AS FARTHER ALTERED AND 
IMPROVED BY CURIO. 


None of the editors or critics have been aware that the edi- 
tions by Curio and Crellius are different from those by 
Curio only. As they have not in their catalogues, in many 
cases, distinguished whether the editions were by Curio and 
Crellius, or Curio only, there is frequently no means of deciding 
but from the dates. As Curio's separate epistle dedicatory is 
dated in 1556, I suppose all editions before that time to be 
the joint edition, and all subsequent to be Curio's. 

They mostly agree in the text, and some of them in having 
wooden cuts. 

But Curio added a German translation of the text, which 
had been before published, Vitebergze, apud Rhau, in 1546, 
of which it is said in the preface, Rhythmis Germanicis, ex 
perantiquo codice sumptis illustravit editor. And his com- 
mentary is a fuller paraphrase of that of Villa Nova, with 
many additions. 

The oldest of these editions which I have met with is— 
1557. De conservandà bonà valetudine opusculum Scholae 

Salernitange, cum Arnoldi enarratione, per Johannem 
Curionem. Antwerp, apud J. Withagium, 8vo. with 
four other short medical works, two poems and two 
treatises, occupying only seven leaves. The epistle 
dedicatory to John Picus is dated in 1556 ; it does not 
mention Crellhus. He mentions a former edition, but 
whether of this work, or only of the joint edition, is 
uncertam. He distinguishes the additions. * 
Bibl. Bodl. 


je 
THE PRINTED EDITIONS. (5 


Francof. apud hzredes Chr. Egenolphi, 16mo. 

Coxn. Grsxzn. 
Francof. apud hzredes Chr. Egenolphi. * Bibl. Bodl. 
Paris. 
Antwerpie, apud Jo. Withagium, 12mo. Maxczr.- 
Conservandz bon: valetudinis precepta integritati resti- 


. tuta et rhytmis Germanicis illustrata, cum Arnoldi, 


exegesi per J. Curionem. Berchensem cel: Erphor- 
diane Reipublice Medicum Physicum. — Francof. 
apud hzredes Christ. Egenolphi. Six short works at 
the end. Commendatory verses to Curio, a Greek 
acrostic, M. Suffridi Petri Leovardiensis Frisii akpoct- 


xXtc-. This is dedicated to Dominus Henning Hopff. * 
Bibl. Bodl. and British Museum. 

Apud heredes Christ. Egenolph. 8vo. 

Lugduni, apud Jo. Lertout, 12mo. 

Paris, apud Hieronymum de Marncf, 12mo. 

Frankfort, apud hzred. Christ. Egenolph. 8vo. 

Venetiis, vo. ACKERMANN. 

Geneve, 8vo. Harrrn. 

Francof. hzered. Egenolphi. ScnvsrEn. 

Colonie, l6mo. Harrzrn. 

Ibid. 8vo. Harrzrn. 

Geneva, apud Jacob Stoer, 8vo. AckEnMaANN. 

Absque loco, 12mo.  HarrEn. 

Francof. 12mo. Bibl. Frilleri. AckrERMANN. 

Colonie, in folio. AckrRMANN. 








Francof. apud Johannem Saurium, 8vo. AckEnwANN. 
Francof. apud Vinc. Steinmeyer. AckERMANN. 
Roms, apud Andream Phacum. in folio patente. Acx. 
Roterodami, l12mo.  AckrzRMANN. 


1636. 


A CATALOGUE OF 


. Venetiis, 12mo. Bibl. Berberni. AckreRMAxN. 
. Francofurti, exc. Matth. Kempffer, impensis Vincentii 


Steinmeyer, 12mo. | ACKERMANN. 


. Franc. apud hzred. Egenolph. 12mo. AckEgnMANN. 


Hygeia: id est, Bone Valetudinis Conservandz The- 
saurus locupletissimus. Colonie, Agrippinz typis Pet. 
à Bruchel, 8vo. min. AckEnMANN. 

There are eleven works on diet in this collection. — Vale- 
tudinis conservande precepta ex Schola Salernitana 
cum commentariis seu exegesi, isone. The edition of 
1568 1s followed. 

'The same, Luxemberg, 12mo. GriNz. AckKERMANN. 

Genevae, 12mo. Harrrn. 


V. MOREAU'S EDITION, WHICH HAS CURIO'S 
COMMENTARY, AND MOREAU'S ANIMAD- 


VERSIONS, but contains a part only of the work. — Pro- 


legomena of fifty-two pages, on the poem and on Leonine 
verse. 


1625. 


1672. 


Schola Salernitana, hoc est de valetudine tuendà, opus 
Novà methodo instructum, infinitis versibus auctum, 
commentaris Villanovani, Curionis, Crelliü, et Con- 
stansoni illustratum. — Adject; sunt animadversiones 
nove et copiose Renati Moreau, Doctoris Medici - 
Parisiensis. Paris, sumptibus Thome Blasi. It is 
dedicated to Cardinal Richelieu in 1624, 8vo. 795 
pages. Apud me.* 

Again at Paris. 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 14 


VI. THE EDITION BY ZACHARIAS SYLVIUS, which 
has only Curio's commentary, and a preface extracted from 
Moreau's prolegomena. The dedication is dated 1648. 


1649. Schola Salernitana, sive de conservandá valetudine pre- 
cepta metrica. Autore Joanne de Mediolano, hac- 
tenus ignoti. Cum luculentà et succinctà Arnoldi 
Villanovani in singula capita exegesi. Ex recepsione 
Zacharie Sylvii, Medici Roterodamensis. Hage.* 

1657. Roterodami ex off. Arnold. Leers. 

——— Haga, in off. Arnold. Leers. 

1660. Aquisgrani, 12mo. 

1667. Roterodami. 

1683. Hagae.  Leers. 

1711. Ratisbonz. 

1712. Argentorati. 

1713. Argentorati. 

1714. Lipsie. 

1722. Ratisbone, sump. Jo. Zach. Seidelii. 

1753. Auguste Vindelicorum. 


VII. EDITIONS WITHOUT THE COMMENTARY. 


1511. 4to. Marsilius Ficinus de triplici vità : scilicet saná, 
longà, et czelitüs, una cum textu seu Regimine Sanitatis 
Salerni. The poem begins, Regimen Sanitatis Salerni- 
tanum, nec non et Magistri Arnoldi de Novà Villà, 
felieitér incipit. Ex officina Johannis Schotti, Argen. 
It is the mere text of Arnaldus's edition. * 

H3 


48 
1516. 


1582. 


1622. 


1623. 
1647. 
1673. 


1712. 
1726. 


1763. 


A CATALOGUE OF 


Lugduni, 4to. per Jacobum Myt, expensis Barthol. Trot. 
MarrTArIRz, tom. ii. p. 1. page 283. 

Proverbialia dicteria ethicam et moralem doctrinam 
complectentia versibus veteribus rythmicis, unà cum 
Germanica interpretatione conscripta, per Andream 
Gartnerum. Francof. apud hezred. C. Egenolph. 8vo. 

It contains extracts from the Regimen.  AckeRMANN. 

Monspessuli, apud Fran. Chovet, 12mo. : ScuvsrEn. 

I place this edition here as it is not mentioned as having 
a commentary. 

Herbipoli, formà patente. Forthesamereason. Harrzm. 

Amstelodami, 12mo. The same reason. 

Schola Salernitana: id est, Conservande Valetudinis 
Praecepta, post plurimas impressiones cum et sine 
commentariis in variis locis, nunc bono commodo om- 
nium sanitati suz providé consulere volentium in h- 
belli hujus formam redacta, unà cum annexis ad finem 
observationibus quibusdam probatissimis. "Typis Mi- 
chael. Thurnmayer, 12mo. | AckERMANN. 

Many genuine verses are omitted, and spurious verses 
added. 

In Quadriga Scriptorum Dizteticorum. |. J. S. Hennin- 
ger. Argent.* British Museum. 

J. S. H. Collectio Scriptorum Medico-dizteticorum, in- 
cluding the Regimen. Lips.8vo. RuicurEm. 

Schola Salernitana, plurimis quibus scatebat mendis 
purgavit, et diversitatem lectionis adjecit Jo. Adamus 
Schier. Athenis ad Elmum. Typis P. Diet. Schnorii 
vidus, 8vo. AcKkERMANN. 

It follows the edition of Moreau, with other copies. The 
various readings are few. 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 19 


1790. Stendalie, sumptibus D. Ch. Franzen ejusque socii 
Grosse. Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, sive Scholz Sa- 
lernitanz& de conservandà bonà valetudine precepta. 
Edidit, Studii Medici Salernitani Historià przmissá, 
Joannes Christ. Gottl. Ackermann, Medicine Doctor 
et in universitate literarum Altorfinà professor ordi- 
narius. * 

The text is printed from that of Villa Nova; there are a 
few explanatory notes, but no commentary. Prefixed 
is the History of the Schola Salerni, and of the poem, 
and a dissertation on Leonine verse, chiefly from Mo- 
reau. With catalogues of manuscripts, and printed 
editions. 


VIII. EDITIONS WITHOUT THE COMMENTARY, 
IN WHICH GREAT ALTERATIONS ARE MADE 
IN THE TEXT. 


1566. The edition of John Francis Lombard, in which the poem 
is altered, or translated into more classical language, 
and the rhymes destroyed. Venice, 1566. 

1600. The same in De Balneis Puteolanis Scriptores, in Italia 
Illustrata. Francof. and in Burmann's Thesaurus 
Antiq. Ital. tom. ix, part iv. * 

1636. Duaci, 12mo.  Novo-Antiqua Schola Salernitana, per 
Reginald. Bruytsma, Medicum Mech. 

The original verses newly arranged, and four hundred 
hexameter and  pentameter verses added, without 
rhyme. * British Museum. 

1641. Again Lovan, in 8vo. * British Museum. 


90 


1474. 
1481. 


1493. 


1495. 


1508. 


1509. 


|. 1532. 


A CATALOGUE OF 


IX. TRANSLATIONS. 


GERMAN. 


Apud Crewssner,in folio. ScnusrER. ACKERMANN. 

Regimen Sanitatis, oder ordnung der Gesundheit. Au- 
gustze Vindelicorum ( Augsburg) infolio. AckERMANN. 

Alternis versibus Latinis et Germanicis. Liptzick. 
PANZER. 

The edition of 1481 repeated in 4to, with the.title Das 
Buch Regimen Sanitatis genannt, gedruckt von Hann- 
sen Froschauer.  Supposed to contain the Schola 
Salerni (Bib. Schwartz, part 2. p. 217). HALLER. 
ACKERMANN. 

Regimen Sanitatis, 4to. Continet 59 disticha, partim 
ex Schola Salernitana, Latiné cum Germanicà versione 
rhythmicà. NNurembergi, per Hieron. Hoeltzel. Pax- 
ZER. 

Regimen Sanitatis Anglorum Regi ex Parisiensi gym- 
nasio missum. With a German translation. In fio- 
rentissimà urbe Brunsvigo, per J. Dom.  PaNzzn. 


. Argentorati (Strasburg), in 4to. GrswEnR. Ackrn- 


MANN. 

Regimen Sanitatis— Anglorum Regi conscripsit Schola 
Solennis. It contains distichs from the Schola Salerni 
and others, with a German version. In Gothic letters, 
without place or date. PawzEm. 

Argentorati, 4to. GrzsNER. JACKERMANN. 

Regimen Sanitatis Medicorum Parisiensium, pro tuendà 
Sanitate Regis Anglice conscriptum—Magistri Franc. 
Mymerni Silesii rhythmis Germanicis et Polonicis ex- 
ornatum. Cracov. per Mat. Scharffenberg. Pawzznm. 


. 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 8l 


1546. Regimen Sanitatis à Scholà Salernitanà, vel Parisinà, 
scriptum, without the commentary, with a German 
translation.  Viteb. apud Georg. Rhaw.* British 
Museum. 

The same translation as in  Curio's edition. Ex 
perantiquo codice. 

1557. Curio's edition. * 

1636. Rhythmis Germanicis illustrata. * Bibl. Bodl. 

1642. Hamburg, 4to. cum versibus Germanicis, apud J. Gut- 
wasser.* British Museum. 

1663. Ulmz, in Jo. Jac. Becheri Parnasso Medico illustrato. 
AÁCKERMANN. 

1750. A German translation by Gotthold Schuster. Franc. 
and Leipz. 8vo. with notes. 


FRENCH TRANSLATIONS. 


1501. Paris in 4to. in French, with the Commentaries of Arnal- 
dus, etc. HaArrER. ACKERMANN. 

———  À book in black letter, published at the beginning of this 
century in 4to. entitled, Le tresor des Paures Selon 
Maistre Arnoudt de Ville Nove— translate du Latin en 
Francois pour l'amour de Dieu, is a translation of 
Villa Nova's book de Regimine Sanitatis. 

1561. Retardement de la mort par bon regime, ou conservation 
de santé, par l'escole de Salerne, traduit de Latin 
en rithme, par Geoffroy le Tellier. Paris, 8vo. 
Bnvusezsr. 

——— Another very old French translation in 4to. black letter, 
without date, entitled, Le Regime tres utile et tres pro- 
fitable pour conserver et guarder la santé.  Bnuwzr. 


829 A CATALOGUE OF 


1561. Paris, with Arnold's Commentary, 4to.  Harrrm. 
ÁCKERMANN. 

1637. A translation in verse, par Michelle Long. Each head 
has a long comment. "This is the second edition. * 
Bibl. Bodl. 1t begins, 


Des Doctes Salernins le college scavant 
Donne au Roy des Anglois le regime suivant ; 
Si tu veux vivre heureux soubmet la violence 
Des flots de ton espirit au frein de ta puissance. 


1651. During the minority of Louis the fourteenth, Scarron had 
rendered the burlesque style fashionable. A Monsieur 
Martin, à physician of Paris, travestied the Regimen 
Salerniin this ridiculous manner. "i'he burlesque ap- 
probation is dated in 1649, and the dedication to Scar- 
ron in 1650. It begins: 


A. vous, Roy de la Grand' Bretagne, 
Jadis le pais de Cocagne, 
L'Eschole des Salernitains 
En corps escrit les vers Latin. 

Latin ? dira quelque Critique— 
Parbleu vous estis Heretique— 


'The two lines, 


Si tibi deficiant medici medici tibi fiant 
Hec tria, mens l;ta, requies, moderata dita, 


are thus paraphrased : 


&i d'hazard extant en Champagne, 
En Anjou, Touraine, en Bretagne, 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 93 


Tu ne peux avoir Medicins, 
Qui rendent les maladies sains, 
Sans te servir d'un Empirique, 
Je t'enseigneray la pratique. 
"Trois medicins, non d'Arabie, 
Ny de Grece, ny d'Italie, 
Te pourrent ayder au besoin, 
Sans les aller chercher fort loin, 
Ils sont meilleur que l'on ne pense, 
Et ne font aucun depence. 
Le premier c'est la gaieté, 
C'ést le fine fleur de Santé, 
C'est de notre vie la sosse?, 
Sans qui vaux mieux estre en la fosse. 
La second, Repos moderé? 
De corps, et d'espint, assuré, 
Ferme, tranquille, invariable. 
Le troisieme, c'est Courte Table, 
Autrement la Sobrieté, 
C'est la Grand-mere de santé, 
81 nostre Grand-pere Hippocrate 
D'un faux oracle ne nous flatte. 


At the end are, Poema Macaronicum de Bello Hu- 
guenotico, and Cocceii Poema Macaronicum. * 
Bibl. Bodl. and British Museum. 
1657. Gratianopoli (Grenoble) the same. 


? Sauce. 
? Repos moderé, from a false stop, to be found elsewhere, re- 
quies moderata, dizta, for moderata dicta. 


84 


1660. 
1664. 


1666. 
1669. 


1671. 


1672. 
1686. 
17438. 


1749. 
1816. 


1549. 


1566. 


1587. 


A CATALOGUE OF 


Le Long, again. 

Martin again, with a French translation of the Macaronic 
poem de Bello Huguenotico. * Bibl. Bodl. 

Le Long again. 

Jaques du Four de la Crespiliere, in a collection of 
epigrams, introduced some parts of the Regimen trans- 
lated into French verse— Afterwards, in 1671, he pub- 
lished the whole under the title of Commentaire en vers 
Francois sur l'ecole de Salerne. "The text is after Mo- 
reau, but the translation is diffuse and ridiculous. It 
contains 596 pages. * British Museum. 


t Again. 


L'Art de conserver sa santé, composé par l'Ecole de Sa- 
lerne. Traduction nouvelle en vers Frangois, par 
Mons. B. L. M./ àlaHaye. AckrERMANN. 

The same, at Paris. AckEenMANN. 

L'Ecole de Salerne, en vers Latin et Francois, par Mons. 
B.L.M. "The text is that of du Four in 1671, omit- 
ting some parts and adding others. "The translation is 
between the serious and the ludicrous— The sense is 
given tolerably. * 


ITALIAN TRANSLATIONS. 


At Venice, in 12mo. Opera utilissima di conservare la 
Sanità. ACKERMANN. 

Venice 4to. by Jo. Francis Lombard. ^Harrzm. 
AÁCKERMANN. 

Perugiz, per Piergiacomum Petrucci impressum Scuola 
Salernitana, del modo di conservarsi in Sanità, trans- 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 85 


portata di Latino in volgare Toscano, da. Frà Serafino 
Razz, 8vo. Lib. Capponi, p. 347. AckrzRwANw. 
1662. Venice, apud Brigoncium. — Scuola Salernitana tradotta 
dal verso Latino in terza rima, col trattato della vita 
sobria di Luigi Cornaro, 8vo. Lib. Capponi. 
ACKERMANN. 
1712. Parms, 8vo. a repetition of F. Lombard's. AckgnMaANx. 
—— Parma. A translation in terza rima, dall' incognito 
Accademico Vivo Morto. "The dedication is to an 
unknown patron. lt is a good and spirited translation, 
with much of the Italian sportive humour. — At the end 
is another poem, Altre regole per conservare la sanità, 
tradotte per il medesimo autore dal Latino di Giorgio 
Pistoroo Vvilingano Tedesco. "There is likewise Cor- 
naro's treatise della vita sobria, * British Museum. 


Signor quel giorno che di qui partisti 
Solinghi ci lascieste in questo sito : 
Ne mai piü à revederci tu venisti. 

Caro patron ho dal Comin redito 
Che generoso sei, e di gran cuore, 
Che sei gentil, e cavalier compito. 

Peró confesso che al tuo gran valore, 
E alla tua gentilezza son restato 
Schiavo perpetuo, e umil servitore. 


Dove dice, ch' un di il collegio tutto 
Fisico de Salerno scrisse a un Sire, 
Che d'Anglia fu patron insin da putto. 


1733. Venice, in 8vo. La Scuola Salernitana dilucidata, o sia, 
I 


96 A CATALOGUE OF 


la scovrimento del vero e del falso, del utile e del inutile, 
di questa stimatissima opera, per sapersi conservar sano, 
e prolungare la vita, spiegandosi tutto sul buon gusto 
moderno. Opera di Fulvio Gherli, Cittadino Modo- 
nese, ed al presente Proto-Medico dell' Altezza Sere- 
niss. del Sig. Duca di Guastalla. In Venezia presso 
Giuseppe Corona. It is in dialogue, and without the 
original text. AckKERMANN. 


DUTCH TRANSLATION. 


1658. At Amsterdam, by J. G. Ackermann. 


BOHEMIAN TRANSLATION. 


172]. Posonii Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum, in Latin and 
Bohemian. AckrRwMaANN. 


POLISH TRANSLATION. 


1532. Regimen Sanitatis Medicorum Parisiensium pro tuendà 
Sanitate Regis Anglie conscriptum. — Magistri Franc. 
Mymerii Silesii rythmis German. et Polonicis. Cracov. 
per Mat. Scharffenberg (before mentioned). Pawzrn. 


An Hiberno-Celtic translation is mentioned by M*Cullock in 
his Highlands of Scotland, 1824, vol. ii. p. 196. 


ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS. 


1530. Regimen Sanitatis Salerni. This boke techynge all 
people to governe them in helthe, is translated out of the 
Latin tounge, by Thomas Paynel, dedicated to Jhon, 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 907 


earl of Oxford. "The verses are not translated, only 
the Sound Printed for Berthélet, * 
British Museum. 
1541. Again. 
1557. Again, in St. Paul's churchyard, at the sign of the 
Lamb, by Abraham Vele. Dedicated to William 
Paulet, marquis of Winchester. * British Museum. 


oe , Again. 


1597. 

1607. Eu Englishman's Docter, or the Schoole of Salerne, or 
physical observations for the perfect preserving of the 
body of man in constant health. London, printed for 
J. Helme, and J. Busby. "The printer says the author 
is unknown to him. This is a translation in English 
verse, without the original, and the commentary. 1t is 
in stanzas of ten lines each, and contains seventy 
stanzas. * Bibl. Bodl. and British Museum. 

It is reprinted in this edition. 

1609. Again. 

1617. For the widow Helme, with precepts for the preservation 
of health, by Ronsovius, without date; printed. at 
Gateshead, with the Latin Text. 

British Museum. * 

1617. Regimen Sanitatis Salerni. The Schoole of Salernes 
most learned and juditious Directorie, or Methodical In- 
structions for the guide and governing the health of 
men. Imprinted by Barnard Alsop. Dedicated to 
Master Joseph Fenton, Esquire—by Anonymous. The 
commentary is a translation of the original commentary 
of Villa Nova. From the beginning it will appear, 
upon comparison, that it is inferior in poetry and spirit 


68 


A CATALOGUE OF 


to the last. By a subsequent edition, it appears to 
have been written by Doctor Philemon Holland. 


Penes me. * 


A1I Salerne Schoole thus write to England's king, 
And for men's health these fit advises bring. 
Shunne busie cares, rash angers, which displease ; 
Light supping, little drinke, doe cause great ease. 


. Rise after meate, sleepe not at afternoone, 


Urine and nature's neede, expell them soone. 

Long shall thou live if all these well be done. 
When phisicke needes, let these thy doctors be, 

Good diet, quiet thoughts, heart mirthful, free. 
Sleepe not too long in mornings, early rise, 

And with coole water wash both hands and eyes. 

Walke gently forth, and stretch out every limbe: 

Combe head, rub teeth, to make them cleane and trim. 

The braine and every member else these doe relieve, 

And to all parts continuall comfort give. 

Bathing, keepe warm, walke after food, or stand, 

Complexions cold doe gentle warmth command. 


OF SAGE. 


Why should man dye (so doth the sentence say) 
When sage grows in his garden day by day. 
And yet all garden physicke not prevailes, 
When death's sterne power our chiefest health assailes. 
Sage comforteth the nerves both sweete and kindly, 
The palsie-shaking hands it helpeth friendly, 
His power is soveraigne gainst an ague fit. 
Sage and the beaver-stone (by learned writ) 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 


Lavender, and the primrose of the spring, 
Tansey, and water-cresses, comfort bring 

To all such members as the palsie shake, 

When in the very greatest kind they quake. 

Sage doth both councell, and keep nature sounde, 
Where sage then groweth, happy is the ground. 


99 


The same translation was published in 1609, 1617, 1624, 
16834, * 1649,* 1667. "Ühe dedication to that of 1634 
is signed R. H. (Richard Holland) and attributes it 


to his father Philemon Holland, doctor of physic. 


In the library of Corpus Christi college, Oxford, amongst 
Brian Twyne's Collections, is a manuscript of this 
poem, with an English translation, bearing date 1575. 
It is entitled, the Maintenance of Health, translated 


and collected by William Withie. 


The puisante kinge of Britannye 
The schole of famous memorye, 
Salernum, biddes him selfe to frame, 
If healthe he woulde and kepe the same: 
Geve cares noe place within thy brest ; 
Lett fretting furies be supprest ; 

To muche of wine use not to swill ; 
Suppe you but lighte, eate not thy fill ; 
At meate to sitte so longe a time, 

To rise is not soe greate a crime ; 

At none geve not thye selfe to slepe ; 
Nor use thy water for to kepe. 


He maye that liste this to observe 
Him selfe long time in healthe preserve. 


Ío9 


90 


A CATALOGUE OF 


When physicke harde is to be hadd, . 
Three things may be in steede. 
The minde in noe wise must be sadde, 
Meane reste, and diette muste thee feede. 
In morne, as sone as thou mayst rise, 
Withe watrye handes make cleane thy eyes, 
Then walke a littel here and there, 
Stretch oute thy limbes, and combe thy here, 
Then rubbe thy teethe; herbye the braine, 
And members all grete comforte gaine. 
In fine, washe well, then warme, then eate, 
And stande a littel after meate, 
Or eles goe walke an easye pase. 
Coole, faire, and softe, in anye case. 


Alias— 


Washe, warme, and eat ; goe or stande ; 
Wexe not colde out of hande. 


The addition, Fons, speculum, gramen, etc. 


The gazinge glasse, and colors greene, 
Such thinges maye pleasantlye be seene, 
The silver stremes bringe grete delight, 
Besides all this they mend our sight, 
The mountaines in the morninge fine, 
The fountaines after none be thine. 


Different metres are used, as 


Non sit acetosa cerevisia. 


The passingste ale is very cleare, 
And beste of all when it is olde ; 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 


The strongest of the malt is dear, 
Good reason certes why it shoulde. 


If that this ale be sodde inoughe, 
A man can have noe better drinke. 

Sharpe ale is noughte, give that the ploughe *, 
By this I love good ale you thinke, 


An exposition of the line 


Unica nux prodest, nocet altera, tertia mors est. 


This speeche perhapes is somewhat darke, 
As riddles use to be, 

The stile thereof with common sense 
Doth not so well agree. 


But for to tell by passinge nutte 
Our author what he meanse ; 

The nutmegge first he profereth 
And that to good intense. 


In second place, what hurtfull is 
He semeth for to tuche? 

Wherein he meaneth the wallnutte 
Doth hurte us over muche. 


But in the last what perils moughte 
Be hidde therein I muse 

Because to eate or cracke that nutte 
No man did ever use. 


* Proof. 5 Touch, or teach. 


99 A CATALOGUE OF 


As well inoughe he knew that wratte 9 
This plesante pretye verse, 

So doeth he bringe in pretilye, 
What nutte doth use to perse?. 


And in his talke of nuttes 1n deede 
In sadness? first he spake, 

But at the last the name of nutte 
As loughte? for to forsake. 


He sayeth that full manye a man 
The crosse bowe hath yslane, 
"The nutte whereof he blames therefore— 
His meaning now is playne 
And I do tell you, not in vaine, 
Tis good from such nuttes to refrain. 


SAGE. 


Whye shoulde men dye while sage is alive! 
Forsooth againste death it is folly to strive. 


PEPPER. 
Quod piper est nigrum. 
Black pepper dispatcheth, yt tarrieth not, 


It quicklye dissolveth, because it is hotte, 


6 Wrote. 7 Pierce. 
$ Seriously. 9 Loth. 


THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 93 


Yt purgeth flume, it helpes to digest, 

Whille pepper is good for paine of the brest. 
By this kinde of pepper the stomache will gaine 
Grete ease, and yt suffers no coughe to remaine, 
The fever approchinge this pepper will fryghte, 
Alsoe the shakinge yt abandoneth quyghte, 


He concludes, as the usual editions of the Regimen 
Salutis, with the lines on the four quarters of the year, 
of which the last 1s :— 


Utilis est requies, sit cum moderamine potus. 


Which he thus translates, continues, and concludes : 


Thy selfe geve to quietnes, els take you plesure, 
A Godes name drincke well, but drincke in mesure. 
I mene not the mesure of a pinte, nor a quarte, 
But a resonable draughte to comforte the harte. 
My paines (in this precepte) beinge taken well, 
Will make me take more—and soe fare ye well. 
The labor accepted herein that I tooke, 
Maye cause make me take more, in some other booke, 


Fare you well. Finis quoth Withie, 

Oxonie, 1575, completa die mensis Februarii primo. 

It is followed by Joachim Camerarius's quatrains upon 
the diet to be observed every month of the year, and a 
poem in rhyming Latin verse by Otho Cremonensis, upon 
the choice of simples and medicines, both translated. 
The latter is very meagre, the translation correspondent. 


94 A CATALOGUE OF THE PRINTED EDITIONS. 


. Est aloes lignum melius sit hoc tibi signum, 
Quod nigredo parum dat fragile subamarum, 
Sit grave, nodosum, subdurum, sit preciosum. 


ASSSA FOTIDA. 


Quó mage foetorem facit Assa tu dic meliorem. 


CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


Those which I have seen I have already arranged in three classes !, 


I. THOSE WHICH AGREE WITH THE EDITIO 
RECEPTA, with occasional various readings, and small 
differences. They are of little value, and, I believe, are mostly 
copied from the printed editions. 


The Harleian MS. (N^. 3706, Art. 1) has the commentary 
of Villa Nova, but is imperfect at the beginning and end. In 
two others, in the same collection, are some extracts and frag- 
ments (N*. 3719. Art 2; N^. 3407. Art. 3). 

In the Ashmolean museum (general catalogue N^. 7756, 
particular catalogue N^. 1388, page 315) is a modern copy on 
paper. 


II. THOSE WHICH HAVE THE EDITIO RECEPTA 
FOR THEIR BASIS, but have changes in the order, and 
great additions. 


In the Ashmolean Museum (general catalogue 7789, parti- 
cular catalogue 1475) a manuscript on vellum, which contains 


many medical treatises, It begins at folio 245, and ends at 281. 


! Page 42. 


96 CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS 


It is written in double columns. The first column contains this 
copy. "Thesecond column is another copy, of which hereafter. 
1t begins as the Editio Recepta, and contains about 1080 verses. 

In the Bodleian library, one MS. (in Wood's MSS. N*. 8608, 
particular number 15) agrees mostly with the last, and is the 
best copy of this class. "The name Anthony Wood, 1660, is 
written in it. On the page opposite the beginning, Liber medi- 
cing, assignatus communi librari& Ecclesie Cathedralis Exon, 
per executores venerabihs viri Magistri Stnetsham, in Sacra 
Theologia Doctoris, et dict» Ecclesi: nuper Canonici et Can- 
cellari. At the end, Explicit per manus T. Dobych. 

Another copy in the DBodleian library, not so perfect or 
correct (N^. 2136, 67). 


III. COPIES WHICH DIFFER GREATLY FROM 
THE RECEPTA EDITIO OF THE SCHOLA SA- 
LERNI, in a more methodical arrangement, and in large 
and scientific additions. 


In the MS. volume above quoted (Ashmolean general cata- 
logue 7789, particular catalogue 1475) in parallel columns 
with the copy above described, from folio 245 to 281, where the 
first copy euds ; and from thence to folio 294, this copy occu- 
pies both columns. 

Another.copy in the Bodleian library (general catalogue 
3544, 228) agrees generally with the last, though not entirely, 
and it is written in a plainer hand. It is inscribed, Liber 
Bibliothecz: Bodleyanz ex dono Joh. Harmari, Lingue Graece 
Professoris Regii A. D. 1651. 


CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS. 97 


The following mAwvscRiPTs have been quoted as being in 
FOREIGN LIBRARIES. Few ofthem have been particularly de- 
scribed, but from the number of verses in each, they may 
probably be referred respectively to the same classes with the 
English manuscripts. 


Moreau quotes the following four manuscripts in his prole- 
gomena. 


1. The Codex Schenckianus, which contains 1239 verses. 

2. 'The Codex Naudinianus has 183 verses. 

3. The Codex Tullovianus 1096. At the end is the colophon: 
Explicit tractatus qui dicitur Flores Medicinz, compilatus 
in studio Salerni à Mag. Joan de Medilano, instrumenti 
medicinalis doctore egregio, compilationi cujus concor- 
darunt omnes Magistri illius Studii. 

4. Moreau's own Codex contained 664 verses. It was ad- 
dressed, Francorum Regi. From this manuscript he has 
inserted many lines not in Villa Nova's text, and all of 
which I have printed amongst the additions. 


9. Three manuscripts are in the king's library at Paris, N^s. 
6931, 6891, 6941. "They have not been described, and 
are mentioned by Harrrng. Bibl. Botan. tom. i. p. 158. 

6. À manuscript on paper in the library which was bequeathed 
to the university of Altorf, by John James Trew, well 
written, and containing 1073 verses, of which the order is 
different from Villa Nova's. There are many marginal 
notes, chiefly in Leonine verse. For instance, to 


Lotio post mensam tibi confert munera bina 
Mundificat palpas (palmas) et lumina reddit acuta : 


K 


98 CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


is written in the margin— 


Est oculis sanum szpé lavare manum. 


It is entitled, Regimen generale. At the end, Explicit 
flos medicine compilatus a Magistro Johanne de Medio- 
lano, Magistro in Medicina in Studio Salerni. Deo 
gratias, anno scriptum 1418? 

7. À manuscript in the Uffenbach library (catalogue part 4, 
page 118), on paper, written in the beginning of the 
sixteenth century. The title is exactly copied from the 
printed editions of the fifteenth century—with scriptum 
per Balthasar Lotwiger civem in Hallis 1506. Probably 
copied from the printed editions. In the same volume is 
Regimen Sanitatis edituum ad Innocentium Papam ter- 
tium in villa Parisiensi ?. 

9. Another manuscript in the same library, page 128, en- 
titled Schola Salernitana de conservanda bona valetudine 
cum nonnullis additamentis et notis marginalibus. De- 
scripsit J. C. Mycropius.  Adject: in fine victus et 
cultus ratio exposita quatuor in singulos menses versibus 
per Joachimum Camerarium. This is evidently modern. 

9. Codex Columesii— Columesias in Cimelüs librarüs, page 
107. It does not contain so many verses as the manu- 
script of Moreau. 

10. At Bennet college in Cambridge, Flos Medicine Anglorum 
Regi. Oxford catalogue N^. 1962, 40. 

In the catalogue of private libraries in England, most of 
which have been sold, and the books dispersed. 

11. Schola Salernitana. Franc. Bernard, catalogue No. 3667. 


? Ackermann, p. 108. 3 [bid. * [bid. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 
16. 


CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS. 899 


Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum. Franc. Bernard, cata- 
logue N^. 3669. 

Doctorum Salernitanorum Versus Medicinales ad Carolum 
Magnum. Ibid, catalogue N^. 3681. This is evidently of 
the third class of manuscripts. 

Schole Salernitanze Versus Medicinales inscripti Carolo 
Magno Francorum Regi—Quorum opusculum in quinque 
partes dividitur. John Hoby, Esq. N^. 3806. Of the 
third class. 

Versus Salernitani. Car. Thyere, N^, 6645. 

Schola Salerni. Ibid. N^. 6681. 





REGIMEN SANITATIS 
SALERNITANUM. 








o) 
LL 

































































MC Á 





NN p - 





Tux masn& cena stomacho fitzmaxima pene. ! 


REGIMEN SANITATIS 
SALERNITANUM. 


ANGLORUM Regi scripsit schola tota Salerni. 

Si vis incolumem, si vis te reddere sanum, 
Curas tolle graves, irasci crede profanum, 
Parce mero, ccenato parum, non sit tibi vanum 
Surgere post epulas, somnum fuge meridianum, 5 
Non mictum retine, nec comprime fortitér anum: 
Hc bené si serves, tu longo tempore vives. 

$1 tibi deficiant medici, medici tibi fiant 
Hzc tria, mens leta, requies, moderata dieta. 9 

Lumina mané manus surgens gelidà lavet aquàá, 
Hàc illàc modicüm pergat, modicümque sua membra 
Extendat, crines pectat, dentes fricet. Ista 
Confortant cerebrum, confortant csetera membra. 
Lote, cale: sta, pranse, veli; frigesce, minute. 

Sit brevis aut nullus tibi somnus meridianus. 1o 
Febris, pigrities, capitis dolor, atque catarrhus, 
Hzc tibi proveniunt ex somno meridiano. 

Quatuor ex vento veniunt in ventre retento, 


104 —J REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


Spasmus, hydrops, colica, vertigo, quatuor ista. 

Ex magnà ccn& stomacho fit maxima poena. — 20 
Ut sis nocte levis sit tibi coena brevis. 

Tu nunquam comedas stomachum nisi noveris ante 
Purgatum, vacuumque cibo quem sumpseris ante. 
Ex desiderio poteris cognoscere certo : 

Hc tua sunt signa, subtilis in ore dicta. 25 

Persica, poma, pyra, lac, caseus, et caro salsa, 

Et caro cervina, leporina, caprina, bovina, 
Hc melancholica sunt, infirmis inimica. 

Ova recentia, vina rubentia, pinguia jura, 

Cum similà purà, nature sunt valitura. 30 

Nutrit et impinguat triticum, lac, caseus infans, 
Testiculi, porcina caro, cerebella, medulla, 

Dulcia vina, cibus gustu jucundior, ova 
Sorbilia, matura ficus, uvieque recentes. 

Vina probantur odore, sapore, nitore, colore. ^ 35 
$1 bona vina cupis, hec quinque probantur in illis, 
Fortia, formosa, fragrantia, frigida, frisca. 

Sunt nutritiva plus dulcia, candida, vina. 
Si vinum rubens nimiüm quandoque bibatur 
Venter stipatur, vox limpida turbificatur. 40 

Allia, nux, ruta, pyra, raphanus, et theriaca, 
H»c sunt antidotum contra mortale venenum. 

Aer sit mundus, habitabilis ac Iluminosus. 

Nec sit infectus, nec olens foetore cloacz. 
S1 tibl scrotina noceat potatio vini 45 


CQ 


-o SS EX 


Wi NEN EE E 






Zi Pese M em 


sr tbc serotina. noceat botatio vim, 





Horà matutin& rebibas et etit medicina 
| Jr Td 


Sit brevis mut xulbus 


Extularat tristes, iratos placat, amantes 


Ne sint amentes phlebotomie facit 





REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


Hor& matutin& rebibas, et erit medicina. 

Gignit et humores meliüs vinum meliores. 

Si fuerit nigrum, corpus reddet tibi pigrum. 
Vinum sit clarumque, vetus, subtile, maturum, 


105 


49 


Ac bené lymphatum, saliens, moderamine sumptum. 


Non sit acetosa cervisia, sed bené clara, 
De validis cocta granis, satis ac veterata. 
De quà potetur stomachus non indé gravetur. 
Temporibus veris modicum prandere juberis, 
Sed calor sstatis dapibus nocet immoderatis. 
Autumni fructus caveas ; ne sint tibi luctus. 
De mensá sume quantum vis tempore bruma. 
Salvia cum rutà faciunt tibi pocula tuta. 
Adde rose florem minuit potentér amorem. 


( De Absynthio!. ) 


90 


Nausea non poterit quemquam vexare marina, 60 


Anteà cum vino mixtam si sumpserit illam. 
Salvia, sal, vinum, piper, allia, petroselinum, 
Ex his fit salsa, nisi sit commixtio falsa. 
Si fore vis sanus ablue sz: pé manus. 
Lotio post mensam tibi confert munera bina, 
Mundificat palmas, et lumina reddit acuta. 
Panis non calidus, nec sit nimis inveteratus, 
Sed fermentatus, oculatus sit, bené coctus, 


! Notin the original. See note. 


65 


106 | REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


Modice salitus, frugibus validis sit electus. 69 
Non comedas crustam, choleram quia gignit adustam. 
Panis salsatus, fermentatus, bene coctus, 
Purus sit sanus, quia non ita sit tibi vanus. 
Est caro porcina sine vino pejor oviná: 
S1 tribuis vina, tunc est cibus et malieixia- 
Ilia porcorum bona sunt, mala sunt reliquorum. 15 
Impedit urinam mustum, solvit citó ventrem, 
Hepatis emphraxim, splenis generat, lapidemque. 
Potus aqu: sumptus fit edenti valde nocivus, 
Infrigidat stomachumque cibum nititur fore crudum. 
Sunt nutritivee multüm carnes vitulinz. 80 
Sunt bona gallina, et capo, turtur, sturna, columba, 
Quiscula, vel merula, phasianus, ethigoneta, 
Perdix, frigellus, orix, tremulus, amarellus, 
Si pisces molles sunt magno corpore tolles, 
Si pisces duri, parvi sunt plus valituri: 85 
Lucius, et parca, saxaulis, et albica, tenca, 
Sornus, plagitia, cum carp&, galbio, truca. 
Vocibus anguille pravas sunt si comedantur. 
Qui physicam non ignorant hzc testificantur. 
Caseus, anguilla, nimis obsunt si comedantur, 90 
Ni tu szpe bibas et rebibendo bibas. 
Si sumas ovum molle sit atque novum. 
 Pisam laudare decrevimus ac reprobare. 
Pellibus ablatis est bona pisa satis | 
Est inflativa cum pellibus atque nociva. 95 


TU ODER Rl 








Spr 

































































if — 


I——— OBERE SER ROG 
— €i RA 
EUER uH 
Ó——M M BÉN f 





L 


[ 





Jj 


[I 

















REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 107 


Lac ethicis sanum, caprinum post camelinum: 
Ac nutritivum plus omnibus est asininum. 
Plus nutritivum vaecinum, sic et ovinum. 
Si febriat caput et doleat non est bené sanum. 
Lenit et humectat, solvit sine febre butyrum. 100 
Incidit, atque lavat, penetrat, mundat quoque, 
serum. 
Caseus est frigidus, stipans, grossus, quoque durus. 
Caseus et panis, bonus est cibus hic bené sanis. 
S1 non sunt sani tunc hunc non jungito pani. 
.Ignari medici me dicunt esse nocivum, 105 
Sed tamen ignorant cur nocumenta feram. 
Languenti stomacho caseus addit opem, 
Si post sumatur terminat ille dapes. 
Qui physicam non ignorant hec testificantur. — 109 
Inter prandendum sit spé parümque bibendum. 
Ut minus zgrotes non inter fercula potes. 
Ut vites pcenam de potibus incipe eznam, 
Singula post ova pocula sume nova. 
Post pisces nux sit, post carnes caseus adsit. 
Unica nux prodest, nocet altera, tertia mors est. 115 
Adde potum pyro, nux est medicina veneno. 
Fert pyra nostra pyrus, sine vino sunt pyra virus. 
Si pyra sunt virus sit meledicta pyrus. 
Si coquas, antidotum pyra sunt, sed cruda venenum. 
Cruda gravant stomachum, relevant pyra cocta gra- 
vatum 120 


108 REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


Post pyra da potum, post pomum vade fzecatum. 
Cerasa si comedas tibi confert grandia dona: 
Expurgant stomachum, nucleus lapidem tibi tollit, 
Et de carne suà sanguis eritque bonus. | 
Infrigidant, laxant, multüm prosunt tibi, pruna. 
Persica cum musto vobis datur ordine justo. 126 
Sumere sic est mos: nucibus sociando racemos. 
Passula non spleni, tussi valet, est bona reni. 
Scrofa, tumor, glandes, ficüs cataplasmate cedit, 
Junge papaver ei confracta foris tenet ossa. 130 
Pediculos, veneremque facit, sed cuilibet obstat. 
Multiplicant mictum, ventrem dant escula strictum. 
Escula dura bona, sed mollia sunt meliora. 
Provocat urinam mustum, citó solvit et inflat. 
Grossos humores nutrit cerevisia, vires 135 
Prestat, et augmentat carnem, generatque cruorem, 
Provocat urinam, ventrem quoque mollit et inflat. 
Infrigidat modicum, sed plus desiccat acetum, 
Infrigidat, macerat, melan: dat, sperma minorat, 
Siecos infestat nervos, et impinguia siccat. 140 
Rapa juvat stomachum, novit producere ventum, 
Provocat urinam, faciet quoque dente ruinam. 
$1 malé cocta datur hinc torsio tunc generatur. 
Egeritur tardé cor, digeritur quoque duré. 
Similiter stomachus, melior sit in extremitates. 145 
Reddit lingua bonum nutrimentum medicine. 
Digeritur facilé pulmo, cito labitur ipse. 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 109 


Est melius cerebrum gallinarum reliquorum. 
Semen foeniculi fugat et spiracula culi. 
Emendat visum, stomachum comfortat anisum. 150 
Copia dulcoris anisi sit melioris. 
Si cruor emanat spodium sumptum citó sanat. 
Vas condimenti preponi debet edenti. 
Sal virus refugat, et non sapidumque saporat. 
Nam sapit esca male quz datur absque sale. 155 
Urunt persalsa visum, spermaque minorant, 
Et generant scabiem, pruritum sive rigorem. 
Hi fervore vigent tres, salsus, amarus, acutus. 
Alget acetosus, sic stipans, ponticus atque. 

Unctus, et insipidus, dulcis, dant temperamentum. 160 
Bis duo vippa facit, mundat dentes, dat acutum 
Visum, quod minus est implet, minuit quod abundat. 

Omnibus assuetam jubeo servare dietam. — 
Approbo sic esse, nisi sit mutare necesse. 164 
Est Hippocras testis, quoniam sequitur inala pestis. 

Fortior est meta medicinz certa dizta: 
Quam si non curas, fatue regis, et male curas. 
Quale, quid, et quando, quantum, quoties, ubi, dando, 
Ista notare cibo debet medicus distando. 

Jus caulis solvit, cujus substantia stringit: ^ 170 
Utraque quando datur venter laxare paratur. 

Dixerunt malvam veteres quia molliat alvum. 
Malvz radices rasz dedere fzeces, 

Vulvam moverunt, et fluxum spé dederunt. 
L 


1llÜÓ | REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


Mentitur mentha si sit depellere lenta 175 
Ventris lumbricos, stomachi vermes que nocivos. 

Cur moriatur homo cui salvia crescit in horto? 
Contra vim mortis non est medicamen in hortis. 
Salvia confortat nervos, manuumque tremores 
Tollit, et ejus ope febris acuta fugit. 180 
Salvia, castoreum, lavendula, premula veris, 
Nastur: athanasia, sanant paralytica membra. 
Salvia salvatrix, nature consiliatrix. 

Nobilis est ruta quia lumina reddit acuta. 
Auxilio rutz, vir, quippe videbis acuté. 185 
Ruta viris coitum minuit, mulieribus auget. 

Ruta facit éastum, dat lumen, et ingerit astum. 
Cocta facit ruta de pulicibus loca tuta. 

De cepis medici non consentire videntur. 
Cholericis non esse bonas dicit Galienus. 190 
Flegmaticis veró multum docet esse salubres, 
Preesertim stomacho, pulerumque creare colorem. 
Contritis cepis loca denudata capillis 
Sepe fricans poteris capitis reparare decorem. 194 

Est modicum granum, siccum, calidumque, sinapi, 
Dat lacrimas, purgatque caput, tollitque venenum. 

Crapula discutitur, capitis dolor, atque gravedo, 
Purpuream dicunt violam curare caducos. 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. lll 


De Urtica. 


ZEgris dat somnum, vomitum quoque tollit adver- 
sum, 

Compescit tussim veterem, colicisqus medetur, 200 
Pellit pulmonis frigus, ventrisque tumorem, 
Omnibus et morbis subveniet articulorum. 

Hyssopus est herba purgans à pectore phlegma. 
Ad pulmonis opus cum melle coquatur hyssopus : 
Vultibus eximium fertur reparare colorem. 205 


De Cerifolio. 


Suppositum cancris tritum cum melle medetur, 
Cum vino potum poterit separare dolorem. 
Sepe solet vomitum ventremque tenere solutum. 
Enula campana reddit przcordia sana. 
Cum sueco rutz» si succus sumitur hujus, 210 
Afhrmant ruptis nil esse salubrius istis. | 


De Pulegio. 
Cum vino choleram nigram potata repellit: 
Sic dicunt veterem sumptum curare podagram. 
De Nasturtio 


Illius succo crines retinere fluentes 
Allitus asseritur, dentisque curare dolorem, 215 
Et squamas succus sanat cum melle perunetus. 


I 


M RE 


112 | REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


De Celedonia. 


Coecatis pullis hàc lumina mater hirundo, 
Plinius ut scribit, quamvis sint eruta reddit. 


De Salice. 


Auribus infusus vermes succus necat ejus. 
Cortex verrucas in aceto coctà resolvit. - 220 
. Pomorum succus flos partus destruit ejus. 
Comfortare crocus dicatur lztificando, 
. Membraque defecta confortat hepar reparando 


De Porro. 


Reddit foeeundas permansum sepe puellas. 

Isto stillantem poteris retinere cruorem. 225 

Quod piper est nigrum non est dissolvere pigrum, 
Flegmata purgabit, digestivamque juvabit. 
Leucopiper stomacho prodest, tussique dolori 
Utile, praeveniet motum febrisque rigorem. 

Et mox post escam dormire nimisque moveri : 2830 
Ista gravare solent auditus, ebrietasque. 

Metus, longa fames, vomitus, percussio, casus, 
Ebrietas, frigus, tinnitum causat in aure. 

Balnea, vina, Venus, ventus, piper, allia, fumus, 
Porri, cum cepis, lens, fletus, faba, sinapi, 235 
Sol, coitus, ignis, labor, ictus, acumina, pulvis, 

Ista nocent oculis, sed vigilare magis. 























[5 














u 

















4 1 
"ZA 















































» 


- 
i 
n 

















P 
E 
E 



































Quatuor humores humano corpore constant, 


Saneuis cum cholevá phle2ma,melancholia, 
F 8 d 
JL 2 5a 

















'The )enpuime Man 


L S , 
HosVemus etBacehus delectant fercula, risus 
l 265 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 113 


F'eniculis, verben&, rosa, celidoniá, rutà, 
Ex istis fit aqua quz lumina reddit acuta. 

Sic dentes serva, porrorum collige grana. 240 
Ne careas jure, (thure?) cum hyoscyamo simul ure. 
Sicque per embotum fumum cape dente remotum. 

Nux, oleum, frigus capitis, anguillaque, potus, 
Ac pomum crudum, faciunt hominem fore raucum. 

Jejuna, vigila, caleas dape, valdé labora, 245 
Inspira calidum, modicum bibe, comprime flatum : 
Hsc bené tu serva si vis depellere rheuma. 

Si fluat ad pectus, dicatur rheuma catarrhus : 
Ad fauces bronchus: ad nares esto coryza. 

Auripigmentum, sulphur, miscere memento: 250 
His decet apponi calcem: commisce saponi. 
Quatuor h;ec misce. Commixtis quatuor istis 
Fistula curatur, quater ex his si repleatur. 

Ossibus ex denis, bis centenisque, novenis, 
Constat homo: denis bis dentibus ex duodenis: 255 
Ex tricentenis, decies sex, quinqueque venis. 

Quatuor humores in humano corpore constant : 
Sanguis cum choler&, phlegma,; melancholia. 

Terra melan: aqua fleg: et aer sanguis, cole: ignis. 

Natura pingues isti sunt atque jocantes, 260 
Semper rumores cupiunt audire frequentes. 

Hos Venus et Bacchus delectant, fercula, risus, 
Et facit hos hilares, et dulcia verba loquentes. 
Omnibus hi studiis habiles sunt, et magis apti. 


LO 


114 REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


Quilibet ex.causá nec hos levitér movet ira. ^ 965 
Largus, amans, hilaris, ridens, rubeique coloris, 
Cantans, carnosus, satis audax, atque benignus. 

Est et humor cholerz», qui competit impetuosis. 
Hoc genus est hominum cupiens precellere cunctos. 
Hi leviter discunt, multüm comedunt, citó crescunt. 
Indé magnanimi sunt, largi, summa petentes. 271 
Hirsutus, fallax, irascens, prodigus, audax, 

Astutus, gracilis, siccus, croceique coloris 

Phlegma vires modicas tribuit, latosque, brevesque. 
Flegma facit pingues, sanguis reddit mediocres. 275 
Otia non studio tradunt, sed corpora somno. 

Sensus hebes, tardus motus, pigritia, somnus. 
Hie somnolentus, piger, in sputamine multus. 
Est huic sensus hebes, pinguis, facie color albus. 

Restat adhue tristis cholerze substantia nigre, 200 
Qu: reddit pravos, pertristes, pauca loquentes. 

Hi vigilant studiis, nec mens est dedita somno, 
Servant propositum, sibi nil reputant fore tutum. 
Invidus, et tristis, cupidus, dextreque tenacis, 

Non expers frandis, timidus, luteique coloris. — 205 

Hi sunt humores qui praestant cuique colores. 
Omnibus in rebus ex phlegmate fit color albus. 
Sanguine fit rubens: cholerà rube&à quoque rufus. 

S1 peccet sanguis, facies rubet, extat ocellus, 
Inflantur genz, corpus nimiumque gravatur, 290 
Est pulsusque frequens, plenus, mollis, dolor ingens 

















The Choleric Man. 
Est humor Cholerz qut comb eiut imp etuosis 


1.269 














/ 


Ji 
/4 


n 
| 
/ 


bl ll 
^l 
Il ll, 
P 


/ 


/ 


/ 

/ 

/,1 HM 
7 


j/ 





IRR 
mu 
// 
























2y 










































"e Thleemalic Man. 
Ütia non studio tradunt, sed. corpor 


teu asi QUOTA) 






































CAL. 


IVvestat adhuc. tristis. Cholera substantia- nigra 


Quae reddit pravos.p ertristes, bavu.ca loquente: 





REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 115 


Maximé fit frontis, et constipatio ventris, 
Siccaque lingua, sitis, et somnia plena rubore, 
Duleor adest sputi, sunt acria, dulcia, quique. 

Denus septenus vix phlebotomiam petit annus. 295 
Spiritus uberior exit per phlebotomiam. 

Spiritus ex potu vini mox multiplicatur, 
Humorumque cibo damnum lenté reparatur. 
Lumina clarificat, sincerat phlebotomia 

Mentes et cerebrum, calidas facit esse medullas, 300 
Viscera purgabit, stomachum ventremque coercet, 
Puros dat sensus, dat somnum, t:xedia tollit, 
Auditus, vocem, vires producit et auget. 

Tres insunt istis (Maius, September, Aprilis), 
Et sunt lunares sunt velut hydra dies: 305 
Prima dies primi, postremaque posteriorum : 

Nec sanguis minui, nec carnibus anseris uti. 

In sene vel juvene si ven: sanguine plenz 

Omni mense bené confert incisio vengo. -— 

Hi sunt tres menses, Maius, September, Apeibis : 3o | 
In quibus eminuas ut longo tempore vivas, 

Frigida natura, frigens regio, dolor ingens, 
Post lavacrum, coitum, minor etas atque senilis, 
Morbus prolixus, repletio potus et esce, 
Si fragilis, vel subtilis sensus stomachi sit, 315 
Et fastiditi, tibi non sunt phlebotomandi. 

Quid debes facere quando vis phlebotomari, 
Vel quando minuis, fueris vel quando minutus ? 


116 | REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM, 


Unctio, sive potus; lavacrum, vel fascia, motus, 
Debent non fragili tibi singula mente teneri. — 320 
Exhilarat tristes, iratos placat, amantes 
Ne sint amentes, phlebotomia facit. 
Fac plagam largam mediocriter, ut citó fumus 
Exeat uberiüs, liberiusque cruor. | 
Sanguine subtracto, sex horis est vigilandum, 325 
Ne somni fumus lzdat sensibile corpus. 
Ne nervum lzdas, non sit tibi plaga profunda. 
Sanguine purgatus non carpas protinus escas. 
Omnia de lacte vitabis rité, minute, 
Et vitet potum phlebotomatus homo. 330 
Frigida vitabis, quia sunt inimica minutis. 
Interdictus erit minutis nubilus aer. 
Spiritus exultat minutis luce per auras. 
Omnibus apta quies, est motus valdé nocivus. 
Principio minuas in acutis, peracutis. 335 
JEtatis medize multum de sanguine tolle, 
Sed puer atque senex tollet uterque parum. 
Ver tollat duplum, reliquum tempus tibi simplum. 
JEstas, ver, dextras: autumnus, hiemsque, sinistras. 
Quatuor hee membra, cephe, cor, pes, hepar, vacuanda. 
Ver cor, hepar &stas, ordo sequens reliquas. 341 
Dat salvatella tibi plurima dona minuta: 
Purgat hepar, splenem, pectus, precordiá, vocem, 
Innaturalem tollit de corde dolorem. 
Si dolor est capitis ex potu, limpha bibatur, 345 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 117 


Ex potu nimio nam febris acuta creatur. 

S1 vertex capitis, vel frons, cstu tribulentur, 
Tempora fronsque simul moderaté sepe fricentur 
Morellà coctá, nec non calidáque laventur. 

Temporis zstivi jejunia corpora siccant. 300 
Quolibet in mense confert vomitus, quoque purgat 
Humores nocuos stomachi, lavat ambitus omnes. 
Ver, autumnus, hiems, estas, dominantur in anno. 
Tempore vernali calidus fit aer, humidusque, 

Et nullum tempus melius fit phlebotomia. 35 
Usus tunc homini Veneris confert moderatus, 
Corporis et motus, ventrisque solutio, sudor, 
Balnea, purgentur tunc corpora cum medicinis. 
JEstas more calet sicca, nascatur in illà 359 
Tunc quoque precipue choleram rubeam dominari. 
Humida, frigida fercula dentur, sit Venus extra, 
Balnea non prosunt, sint rare phlebotomis, 

Utilis est requies, sit cum moderamine potus. — 363 


e 


A^ 





THE 


ENGLISHMAN'S 
DOC T E R. 


OR, 
THE SCHOOLE OF SALERNE. 
OR, 


Physicall Obseruations for the perfect 
Preseruing of the Body of Man in 
continuall Health. 





LONDON : 


Printed for Jon HgrMzE, & Jonw Buszey, jun. 
and are to be sold at the little shoppe, 
next Clfford's Ínne Gate, in Fleet- 
street. 1607. 





THE PRINTER 


TO THE READER. 


READER, the care that I haue of thy health, appears 

in bestowing these Physicall rules vpon thee : neither 

needest thou be ashamed to take Lessons out of this school, 

for our best Doctors scorne not to read the instructions. 

It is a little Academi, where euery man may be a Graduate, 

and proceed Doctor in the ordering of his owne body. It 

is a Garden, where all things grow that are necessarie for 

thy healthe. "This medicinable Tree grewe first in Salerne, 

from thence it was remoued, and hath born both fruit and 

blossomes a long time in England. It is now replanted 

in a wholsom ground, and new earth cast about it, by the 

hand of a cunning Gardiner, to. keep it still in flourishing. 

Much good husbandry is bestowed vpon it; yet whatso- 
euer the cost be, thou reapest the sweetnesse of it for a 

small value. It came to me by chance, as a Jewell that 1s 

found, whereof notwithstanding I am not couetous, but, 
part the Treasure amongst my contrymen. "The author of 
the paines, is to me vnknowne, and I put this child of his 

into the open world without his consent: bring it up there- 
fore well I beseech thee, and hope (as I do) that he vill 

not be angry, finding this a traueler abroad, when by his 

trauel, so many of his owne country, are so manifo!dly 

benefited. 

FAREWELL. 
M 


AD LIBRUM. 


Go booke, and (like a marchant) new arriu'd, 

Tel in how strange a traffick thou hast thriu'd 
Vpon the country which the Sea-god saues, 

And loues so dere, he bindes it round with waues : 
Cast anchor thou, and impost pay to him 

Whose Swans vpon the brest of Isis swim ; 

But to the people that do loue to buy, 

(It skils not for how much) each Nouelty, 
Proclaime an open Mart, and sell good cheap, 
What thou by trauell and much cost doest reape. 
Bid the gay Courtier, and coy Ladie come, 

The Lawyer, Townsman, and the Country-groom, 
Tis ware for all: yet thus much let them know, 
There are no drugs here fetcht from Mexico, 

Nor gold from India, nor that stinking smoake, 
Which English gallants buy, themselues to choak. 
Nor Silkes of T'urkie, nor of Barbary, 

Those luscious Canes, where our rich Sugars lie: 
Nor those hot drinkes that make our wits to dance 
The wild Canaries, nor those Grapes of France 
Which make vs clip our English: nor those wares 
Of fertile Be/gia, whose wombe compares 

With all the world for fruit, tho now with scarres 
Her body be all ore defac't by warres : 

Go, tell them what thou bring'st, exceeds the wealth 
Of all these Contries, for thou bring'st them mrALTH. 


IN LIBRUM. 


Wit, Learning, Order, Elegance of Phrase, 

Health, and the Art to lengthen out our dayes, 
Phylosophy, Physicke, and Poesie, 

And that skill which death loues not ( Surgery ), 
Walkes to refresh us, Ayres most sweet and cleare; 
A thrifty Table, and the wholsomest cheare. 

AI sortes of graine, all sortes of Flesh, of Fish, 
Of Foule and (last of all) of Fruits a severall dish: 
Good Breakefasts, Dinners, Suppers, after-meales, 
The hearbe for Sallads, and the hearbe that heales. 
Physitian's counsell, Pottecaries pils, 

(Without the summing vp of costly bils.) 

Wines that the Braine shall nere intoxicate, 
Strong Ale-and Beere at a more easie rate 

Than Water from the fountaine; cloths (not deere) 
For the foure seuerall quarters of the yere. 

Meats both for Protestant and Puritan, 

With meanes sufficient to maintaine a man. 

If all these things thou want'st, no farther looke, 
AIl this, and more than this, lies in this booke. 


ANONIMUS. 


IN LAUDEM OPERIS. 


The gods vpon a time in council sitting, 

(To rule the world) what creature was most fitting, 
At length from god to god this sentence ran, 

To forme a creature like themselues (cald man). 
Being made, the world was giuen him (built so rarely), 
No workemen can come neere it; hung so fairely, 
That the gods viewing it, were ouer-ioyed, 

Yet greeu'd that it should one day be destroyed. 
Gardens had man to walke in, set with trees 

That still were bearing; but (neglecting these), 

He long'd for fruites vnlawfull, fell to riots, 
Wasted his goodly body by ill dyets, 

Spent (what was left him) like a prodigall heyre, 
And had of earth, of hell, or heauen no care, 

For which the earth was curst, and brought forth weeds, 
Poyson euen lurking in our fayrest seeds, 

Halfe heauen was hid, and did in darkness mourn, 
Whilst hell kept fires continual, that should burne 
His very soule, if still it went awry, 

And giue it torments that should neuer die, 
Yetloe! How blest is man! the deities, 

Built vp this Schoole of Health, to make him wise. 


THE 


SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Tnz Salerne Schoole doth by these lines impart, 
All health to England's king, and doth aduise 
From care his head to keepe, from wrath his harte. 
Drinke not much wine, sup light, and soone arise, 
When meat is gone long sitting breedeth smart : 
And after noone still waking keepe your eies, 
When mou'd you find your selfe to nature's need 
Forbeare them not, for that much danger breeds, 
Vse three physitians still, first doctor Quiet, 

Next doctor Mery-man, and doctor Dyet. 


Füise early in the morne, and straight remember 
With water cold to wash your hands and eyes, 
In gentle fashion retching euery member, 
And to refresh your braine when as you rise, 
In heat, in cold, in Ju/y, and December, 
Both comb your head, and rub your teeth likewise: 
If bled you haue, keepe coole, if bath'd, keepe warm, 
If din'd, to stand or walke will do no harme. 
Three things preserve y* sight, glasse, grasse, and fountains: 
At eue'n springs, at morning visit mountaines. 

M 3 


126 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


If R, be in the month, their iudgements erre, 

That thinke that sleepe in afternoone is good, 

If R be not therein, some men there are, 

That thinke a little nap breeds no ill blood, 

But if you shall heerein exceed too farre, 

It hurts your health, it cannot be withstood : 

Long sleep at afternoones by stiring fumes, 

Breeds S/owth and .Agewes, Aking heads and Rheums, 
The Moysture bred in Breast, in Iawes, and Nose, 
Are cald Catarrs, or 'T'ysique, or the Pose. 


Great harms haue grown, and maladies exceeding 

By keeping in a little blast of wind, 

So Cramps, and Dropsies, Collicks haue their breeding, 
And JMazed Braines for want of vent behind. 

Besides we find in stories worth the reading, 

A certaine Roman Emperor was so kind, 

Claudius by name, he made a Proclamation, 

A. Scape to be no losse of reputation. 

Great suppers do the stomacke much offend, 

Sup light if quyet you to sleepe intend. 


To keepe good dyet, you should neuer feed, 

Vntill you find your stomacke cleane and voide, 

Of former eaten meats, for they do breed 

Repletion, and will cause you soone be cloid, 

None other rule but appetite should need, 

When from your mouth a moisture cleare doth void. 

All Peares and Apples, Peaches, Milke, and Cheese, 

Salt meats, red Deere, Hare, Beefe, and Goat : all these 
Are meats that breed ill blood, and Melancholy, 

If sicke you be, to feed on them were folly. 


THE SALERNE SHOOLE. 127 


Eeges newly laid, are nutritiue to eat, 

And rosted reare are easie to digest. 

€ Fresh Gascoign wine is good to drink with meat 
-Broth strengthens nature aboue all the rest, 

But broth prepar'd with flowre of finest wheate, 
Well boyl'd, and full of fat for such are best. 

$| The Priest's rule is (a Priest's rule shold be true,) 
Those Egges are best, are long, and white, and new, 
Remember eating new laid Egges and soft, 

For euery Egge you eat you drinke as oft. 


Fine Manchet feeds to fat, Milke fills the vaines, 
New Cheese doth nourish, so doth flesh of swine, 
The Dowcets of some beasts, the marrow, brains, 
And all sweet-tasting-flesh, and pleasant wine, 

Soft Egges (a cleanly dish in house of Swains), 
Ripe Figs and Raysins, late come from the Vine: 
Chuse wine you meane shall serve you all the year, 
Well-savour'd, tasting well, and color'd cleere, 

Fiue qualities there are, wine's praise aduancing, 
Strong, beawtyfull, and fragrani, coole, and dauncing. 


White Muskadell and Candy wine, and Greeke, 
Do make men's wits and bodies grosse and fat ; 
Red wine doth make the voyce oft time to seek, 
And hath a binding quality to that, 

Canary and Madera, both are like 

To make one leane indeed (but wot you what), 
Who say they make one leane wold make one laffe 
They meane, they make one leane vpon a staffe. 
Wine, women, baths, by art or nature warme, 

Vs'd or abus'd do men much good or harme. 


198 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Six things that heere in order shall insue, 

Against all poysons haue a secret poure, 

Peares, Garlick, Reddish-roots, Nuts, Rape, and Rew, 
But Garlicke cheefe, for they that it deuoure, 

May drink, and care not who their drink do brew 
May walk in ayres infected euery houre: 

Sith Garlicke then hath poure to saue from death, 
Beare with it though it make unsauoury breath: 

And scorne not Garlicke like to some, that think 

It onely makes men winke, and drinke, and stink. 


"Though all ill sauours do not breed infection, 

Yet sure infection commeth most by smelling, 
Who smelleth still perfumed his complexion 

Is not perfumed by poet Martial's telling, 

Yet for your lodging roomes giue this direction, 
In houses where you mind to make your dwelling, 
That nere the same there be no euil scents 

Of puddle waters, or of excrements. 

Let ayre be cleare and light, and free from faultes, 
That come of secret passages and vaults. 


If wine haue ouer night a surfet brought, 

A thing we wish to you should happen seeld 
Then early in the morning drinke a draught, 

And that a kind of remedy shall yeeld, 

But gainst all surfets vertue's schoole hath taught, 
To make the gift of temperance a sheeld : 

The better wines do breed the better humours, 
The worse, are causes of vnwholesome tumors: 

In measure drinke, let wine be ripe, not thicke, 
But cleere and well alaid, and fresh, and quicke. 


TEH SALERNE SCHOOLE. 129 


The like aduice we give you for your beere, 

We will it be not soure, and yet be stale, 

Well boyl'd, of harty graine, and old, and cleare, 
Nor drinke too much, nor let it be too stale : 
And as there be foure seasons in the yeare, 

In each a seuerall order keepe you shall. 

In Spring, your dinner must not much exceed, 
In Summer's heat, but little meat shall need : 

In Autumne, ware you eat not too much fruit, - 
With Winter's cold, full meats do fittest sute. 


If in your drinke you mingle Rew with Sage, 
All poyson is expel'd by power of those, 
And if you would withal lust's heat asswage, 
Adde to them two the gentle floure of Itose. 
*| Who would not be Sea-sick when seas do rage, 
Sage-water drinke with wine before he goes. 
q| Salt, Garlicke, Parsely, Pepper, Sage, and Wine, 
Make sawces for all meats both coarse and fine, 
Of washing of your hands much good doth ryse, 
Tis wholesome, cleanly, and releeues your eyes. 


Eate not your bread too stale, nor eat it hot, 
A little leuen'd, hollow-bak't and light: 
Not fresh, of purest grain that can be got, 
The crust breeds choller both of brown and white, 
Yet let it be well bak't or eat it not, 
How ere your tast therein may take delight. 

q| Porke without wine it not so good to eate 
As Sheepe with wine, it medicine is and meate, 
Tho intrayles of a beast be not the best, 
Yet are some intrayles better then the rest. 


130 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Some loue to drinke new wine not fully fin'd, 

But for your health we wish that you drinke none, 
For such to dangerous fluxes are inclin'd, 
Besides the lees of wine doth breed the stone. 
Some to drinke onely water are assign'd : 

But such by our consent shall drinke alone, 

For water and small beere we make no question, 
Are enemies to health and good digestion : 

And Horace in a verse of his rehearses, 

That Water-drinkers neuer make good verses. 


The choyse of meats to health doth much auayle 

First Veale is wholsome meat, and breeds good blood, 
So Capon, Hen, and Chicken, Patridge, Quaile, 

The Phesant, Woodcock, Lark, and Thrush be good, 
The Heath-cock wholsome is, the Doue, the Raile, 
And all that do not much delight in mud: 

Fair swans, such loue your beauties make me bear you, 
That in the dish I easily could forbeare you. 

Good sport it is to see a Mallard kil'd, 

But with their flesh your flesh should not be fil'd. 


As choyce you make of Fowle, so make of Fish, 

If so that kind be soft, the great be best, 

If firme, then small, and many in a dish: 

I need not name, all kinds are in request, 

Pyke, Trowt, and Pearch, from water fresh I wish, 
From sea, DBace, Mullet, Brean, and Soules, are best : 
The Pyke a rauening tyrant is in water, 

Yet he on land good meat yeelds neare the later. 

If Eeles and Cheese you eat, they make you hoarse 
But drinke apace thereto, and then no force. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE; 


Some loue at meals to drink small draughts and oft, 
But fancie may heerein, and custome guid, 

If egges you eat they must be new and soft, 

In peaze good qualities, and bad are tryed, 

To take them with the skin that growes aloft, 

They windie be, but good without their hide. 

In great consumptions learn'd physitians thinke; 
Tis good a Goat or Camel's milke to drinke, 

Cowe's milke and Sheepes do well, but yet an 4ss's, 
Is best of all, and all the other passes. 


Mülke is for .Agewes and for Headache naught, 

Yet if from ague's fit you feel you free, 

Sweet- Butter wholsome is, as some haue taught, 
To cleanse and purge some paines that inward be: 
«€ Whay, though it be contemn'd, yet it is thought, 
To scoure, and clense, and purge in due degree: 

$| For healthy men may cheese be wholsome food, 
But for the weake and sickly "tis not good, 
Cheese is an heauie meat, and grosse, and cold, 
And breedeth costiuenesse both new and old. 


Cheese makes complaint that men on wrong suspitions 
Do slander it, and say it doth such harme, 

That they conceale his many good conditions, 

How oft it helpes a stomacke cold to warme, 

How fasting tis prescrib'd by some physitians, 

To those to whom the flux doth giue alarm: 

We see the better sort thereof doth eate, 

To make as twere a period of their meat, 

The poorer sort when other meat is scant, 

For hunger eate it to releeue their want, 


131 


]1939 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Although you may drinke often while you dine, 
Yet after dinner touch not once the cup, 

I know that some physitians do assigne 

To take some liquor straight before they sup : 
But whether this be meant by broth or wine, 

À controuersie "tis not yet tane vp: 

To close your stomacke well, this order sutes, 
Cheese after Flesh, Nuts after Fish or Fruits. 

Yet some haue said (beleeue them as you will), 
One INu£ doth good, two hurt, the third doth kill. 


Some JVut, gainst poyson is preseruatiue ; 

Peares, wanting wine, are poyson from the tree, 

But bak't Peares counted are restoratiue, 

Raw Peares a poyson, bak't a medicine be: 

Bak't Peares, a weak-dead-stomacke do reuiue, 
Raw Peares are heauy to digest we see, 

Drinke after Peares, take after Apples order 

To haue a place to purge your selfe of ordure. 

Ripe Cherries breed good blood, and help the stone, 
If Cherry you do eat, and Cherry-stone. 


Coole Damsens are, and good for health by reason 
They make your intrayles soluble and slacke, 

Let Peaches steepe in wine of newest season, 

Nuts hurt their teeth, y* with their teeth they cracke, 
With euery "Nut tis good to eat a. Reason, 

For though they hurt the sp/ene they help the back : 
A plaister made of Figges by some men's telling, 

Is good against all kirnels, boyles, and swelling, 
With Poppy ioyn'd, it drawes out bones are broken, 
By Figs are lice engendred, Lust prouoken. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Eat Medlars if you haue a looseness gotten, 

They bind, and yet your vrine they augment, 

They haue one name more fit to be forgotten, 

While hard and sound they be they be not spent, 

Good .Medlars are not ripe till seeming rotten, 

For meddling much with Medíars some are shent. 
New Rhennish-wine-stirs vrine, doeth not binde, 

But rather loose the belly, breeding wind, 

Ale, humours breeds, it addes both flesh and force, 

Tis loosing, coole, and vrine doth inforce. 


Sharpe Vinegar doth coole, withall it dries, 
And giues to some ill humour good correction : 
It makes one melancholy, hurts their eyes, 
Nor making fat, nor mending their complection : 
It lessens sperm, makes appetite to rise: 
Both taste and scent is good against infection. 
«| The T'urnep hurts the stomacke, wind it breedeth 
Stirs vrine, hurts his teeth thereon that feedeth : 
Who much thereof will feed, may wish our nation 
Would well allow of Claudius! proclamation. 


It follows now what part of euery beast 

Is best to eat: first, know the heart is ill, 

It is both hard, and heauy to disgest, 

The Tripe, with no good iuice our flesh doth fill: 
The Lites, are light, yet but in small request: 
But outer parts are best in Physicke's skill. 

«| If any braines be good (which is a question), 
Hennes braine is best, and lightest of disgestion: 
«| Iu Fennell-seed this vertue you shall find, 

Forth of your lower parts to drive the wind. 
N 


133 


134 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Of Fennell vertues foure they do recite, 

First, it hath power some poysons to expell, 
Next burning Agues it will put to flight, 

The stomacke it doth cleanse, and comfort well : 
And fourthly it doth keepe, and cleanse the sieht, 
And thus the seed and herbe doth both excell. 
Yet for the two last told ; if any seede 

With Fennell may compare, tis Annis-seed : 

Some Znny seeds be sweet, and some more bitter, 
For pleasure these, for medicine those more fitter. 


Dame Nature's reason, far surmounts our reading, 
We feele effects, the causes oft vnknowne, 

Who knows ye cause why Spodium stancheth bleeding, 
( Spodium, but ashes of an ox's bone). 

We learne herein to praise His power exceeding, 

That vertue gave to wood, to herbes, to stone, 

The Liuer Spodium, Mace the heart delightes, 

The braine likes Muske, and .Lycoras the Lites, 

The spleen is thought much comforted with Capers. 

In stomacke, Gal/ingale allayes ill vapors. 


Sawce would be set with meat vpon the table, 
Salt is good sawce, and had with great facility : 
Salt makes vnsauoury vyands, manducable, 

To driue some poysons out, Sa/t hath ability, 
Yet things too salt are nere commendable: 

They hurt the sight, in nature cause debility, 
The scab and itch on them are euer breeding, 
The which on meats too salt are often feeding : 
Salt should be first remou'd, and first set downe, 
At table of the knight, and of the clowne. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 185 


As tastes are diuers, so Physitians hold 
They haue as sundry qualities and power, 
Some burning are, some temperate, some cold, 
Cold are these three: the fart, the sharpe, the sour : 
Salt, bitter, biting, burne as hath been told, 
Sweet, fat, and fresh, are temperate euery houre. 
q| Foure special vertues hath a sop in wine, 
It maketh the teeth white, it cleeres the eyne, 
It addes vnto an empty stomacke fulness, 
And from a stomacke fill'd, it takes the dulness. 


If to an vse you haue your selfe betaken, 
Of any diet, make no sudden change, 
A. custome is not easily forsaken, 
Yea though it better were, yet seemes it strange, 
Long vse is as a second nature taken. 
With nature custome walkes in equal range. 
4| Good dyet is a perfect way of curing, 
And worthy much regard and health assuring, 
A King that cannot rule him in his dyet, 
Will hardly rule his Realme in peace and quyet. 


They that in Physicke will prescribe you food, 
Six things must note we here in order touch, 
First, what it is : and then, for what tis good, 
And when ; and where ; how often ; and how much, 
Who note not this, it cannot be withstood, 
They hurt, not heale, yet are too many such. 
«| Coleworts broth doth loose, the substance bind, 
Thus play they, fast and loose, and all behind. 
But yet if at one time you take them both, 
The substance shall giue place vnto the broth. 


136 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


In Physicke Mallowes hath much reputation, 
Their very name of Mellow seemes to sound, 
The roote thereof will giue a kind purgation, 
By them both men and women good haue found. 
To women's monthly flowers they give laxation, 
They make men soluble that haue been bounde, 
And least we seem in Mallowes praises partial, 
Long since hath Horace praised them and Martial. 
€| The wormes that gnaw the womb and neuer stint, 
Are kill'd, and purg'd, and driuen away with Mint. 


But who can write thy worth (6 soueraigne Sage ), 
Some ask how men can die, where thou dost grow. 
Oh that there were a Medicine curing age, 

Death comes at last, tho death come nere so slow: 
Sage strengths the sinews, Feauers heat doth swage, 
The Palsie helpes, and rids of mickle woe, 

In Latine ( Saluia ) takes the name of safety, 

In English (Sage) is rather wise than crafty : 

Sith then the name betokens wise, and sauing, 

We count it nature's frend, and worth the hauing. 


Take Sage and Primrose, Lauender, and Cresses, 
With Walwort that doth grow twixt lime and stone, 
For he that of these herbes the iuice expresses, 
And mix with powder of a Castor-stone, 
May breed their ease whom Palsie much oppresses, 
Or if this breed not helpe, then looke for none. 

«  Rew is a noble herbe to giue it right, 
To chew it fasting it will purge the sight, 
One quality thereof yet blame I must, 
It makes men chaste, and women fills with lust. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 137 


Fayre Ladies, if these Physicke rules be true, 
That Rew hath such strange qualities as these, 

Eat little Rew, least your good husbands (REVV) 
And breed betweene you both a shrow'd disease. 
Rew, whets the wit, and more to pleasure you, 

In water boil'd, it rids a roome of fleas. 

I would not to you Ladies, Onyons praise, 

Saue that they make one fayre ( ZEsclapius saies ) 
Yet taking them requires some good direction, 
They are not good alike for each complexion. 


If vnto Choller men be much inclin'd, 

Tis thought that Onyons are not good for those, 
But if a man be Flegmatique (by kind) 

It does his stomacke good, as some suppose, 
For ointment iuice of Onyons is assign'd 

. To heads whose haire falls faster than it growes: 
If Onyons cannot helpe in such mishap, 

À. man must get him a Gregorian cap. 

But if your hound by hap should bite his master, 
With Honey, Rew, and Onyons make a plaister. 


The seed of Mustard is the smallest graine, 
And yet the force thereof is very great, 

It hath a present power to purge the braine, 
Itaddes vnto the stomacke force and heat: 
All poyson it expels, and it is plaine, 

With sugar tis a passing sawce for meat. 

She that hath hap a husband bad to bury, 

And is therefore in heart not sad but merry: 
Yet if in shew good manners she will keepe, 
Onyons and. Mustardseed will make her weepe. 


Le: 
NO 


138 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Though Violets smell sweet, Nettles offensiue, 
Yet each in seuerall kind much good procure, 
The first doth purge the heauie head and pensiue, 
Recouers surfets, Falling sickness cures. 

Tho Nettles stinke, yet make they recompence, 
If your bellie by the Collieke paine indures: 
Against the Collicke Nettle-seed and Honey, 
Is Physicke; better none is had for money. 
It breedeth sleep, staies vomits, flegme doth soften, 
It helpes him of the Gowt that eats it often. 


Cleane Hysop is an herbe to purge and cleanse, 
Raw flegmes, and hurtfull humours from the breast ; 
The same vnto the Lungs great comfort lends, 
With Honey boil'd: but farre aboue the rest, 
It giues good colour, and complexion mends, 
And is therefore with women in request : 

With Honey mixt, Cinquefoyle cures the Canker, 
That eats our inward parts with cruel ranker, 
But mixt with Wine, it helpes a greeued side, 
And staies the vomit, and the Laske beside. 


KEllecompane strengthens each inward part, 

A little looseness is thereby prouoken: 

It swageth greefe of mind, it cheeres the heart, 

Allayeth wrath, and makes a man fayre spoken : 

And drunke with Rew in Wine, it doth impart 

Great helpe to those that haue their bellies broken. 
Let them that vnto choller much incline, 

Drink Penny-royal steeped in their wine, — . 

And some affirme, that they haue found by trial 

The paine of Gowt is cur'd by Penny-royal. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


To tell all Cresses! virtues long it were, 

But diuers patients vnto that are debter, 

It helpes the teeth, it giues to bald men haire, 

With Honey mixt, it Ringworme kills and. Tettar : 

But let not women that would children beare, 

Feed much thereof, for they to fast were better. 
An herbe there is takes of the Swallowes name, 

And by the Swallowes gets no little fame, 

For Pliny writes (tho some thereof make doubt), 

It helps young Swallowes eies when they are out. 


Greene Willow though in scorne it oft is vs'd, 
Yet some there are in it not scornfull parts, 

It killeth wormes, the iuice in eares infus'd, 
With Vinegar: the barke destroyeth warts. 

But at one quality I much haue mus'd, 

That addes and bates much of his good desertes, 
For writers old and new, both ours and forren, 
Affirme the seed make women chaste and barren. 
Take Saffron if your heart make glad you will, 
But not too much, for that the heart may kill. 


Greene Leekes are good as some Physitians saie, 
Yet would I choose, how ere I them belieue, 
To weare Leekes rather on Saint Dawid's day, 
Than eat the Leekes vpon Saint Dauid's Eue. 
The bleeding at the nose Leeke's iuice will stay, 
And women bearing children, much releeue. 
€| Blacke Pepper beaten grosse you good shall find 
If cold your stomacke be, or full of wind: 
White Pepper helps the cough, and flegme it riddeth, 
And Ague's fit to come it oft forbiddeth. 


139 


140 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Our Hearing is a choyce and dainty sence, 

And hard to mend, yet soone it may be marr'd 
These are the things that breed it most offence, 
To sleepe on stomacke full, and drinking hard : 
DBlowes, falls, and noise, and fasting, violence, 
Great heat, and sudden cooling afterward : 

AI these, as is by sundry proofes appearing, 
Breed tingling in our eares, and hurt our hearing : 
Then thinke it good aduice, not ydle talke, 

That after supper bids vs stand or walke. 


You heard before what is for hearing naught, 
Now shall you see what hurtfull is for sight : 
Wine, Women, Bathes, by art or nature wrought, 
Leekes, Onyons, Garlicke, Mustard-seed, fire and light : 
Smoake, Bruises, Dust, Pepper to powder brought, 
Beans, Lentils, Strains, Wind, Tears, and Phabus bright, 
And all sharpe things our eie-sight do molest: 
Yet watching hurts them more than all the rest. 

« Of Fennell, Veruin, Kellidon, Roses, Rew, 
Is water made, that will the sight renew. 


If in your teeth you hap to be tormented, 

By meane some little wormes therein do breed, 

Which paine (if heed be tane) may be preuented, 

By keeping cleane your teeth, when as you feede : 

Burne Francomsence (a gum not euil sented), 

Put Henbane vnto this, and Onyon-seed, 

And with a Tunnel to the tooth that's hollow, 

Conuey the smoake thereof, and ease shall follow. 
«4 By Nuts, Oyle, Eeles, and cold in head 

By Apples and raw fruites, is hoarsness bred. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE- 141 


To shew you how to shun raw running Rheumes, 
Exceed not much in meate, in drinke, and sleepe, 
For all excess is cause of hurtfull fumes, 
Eate warme, broth warme, striue in your breath to keepe 
Vse exercise, that vapours ill consumes, 
In Northerne winds abroad do neuer peepe. 

«| If Fistula do rise in any part, 
And so procure your danger, and your smart, 
Take Arsnicke, Brimstone, mixt with Lime and Sope, 
And make a Tent, and then of cure there's hope. 


If so your head to paine you oft with aking, 
Faire water, or small beere drinke then or neuer, 
So may you scape the burning fits and shaking, 
That wonted are to company the Feuer: 
«| If with much heat your head be in ill taking, 
To rub your head and Temples still perseuer, 
And make a bath of Morrell (boiled warme) 
And it shall keepe your head from further harme. 
«| A Flix a dangerous euill is, and common, 
In it shun cold, much drink, and strains of women. 


To fast in Summer doth the body drie, 
Yet doth it good, if you thereto invre it, 
Against a surfet, vomiting to try, 
Is remedy, but some cannot indure it: 
Yet some so much themselues found help thereby, 
They go to sea a purpose to procure it. 

€| l'oure seasons of the yeare there are in all, 
The Summer, and the Winter, Spring, and Fall : 
In euery one of these, the rule of reason, 
Bids keepe good dyet, suiting euery season. 


149 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


The Spring is moist, of temper good and warme, 
Then best it is to bath, to sweat, and purge, 

Then may one ope a veyne in either arme, 

If boiling blood or feare of Agues vrge, 

Then Venus! recreation doth no harme, 

Yet may too much thereof turne to a scourge. 

In Summer's heat (when choller hath dominion) 
Coole meats and moyst are best in some opinion : 
The Fal/is like the Spring, but endeth colder, 
With wines and spice the Winter may be bolder. 


Now if perhaps some haue desire to know, 

The number of our bones, our teeth, our veynes, 
This verse ensuing plainely doth it shew, 

To him that to obserue it taketh paines: 

The Teeth thrice ten and two, twice eight a row, 
Eleuenscore bones saue one in vs remaines: 

For veynes that all may vaine in vs appeare, 

A veyne we haue for each day in the yeare: 

AII these are like in number and connexion, 

The difference growes in bigness and complexion. 


Foure Humours raigne within our bodies wholly, 
And these compared to foure Elements, 

The Sanguin, Choller, Flegme, and .Melancholy, 
The later two are heauy, dull of sence, 

The tother are more Jouiall, Quicke, and Jolly, 
And may be likened thus (without offence) 

Like ayre both warme and moyst, is Sanguin cleare, 
Like fire doth. CAoller hot and dry appeare, 

Like water, cold and moist (is Flegmatique ), 

The Melancholy cold, dry earth is like. 


THE SALERNE SHOQOLE. 


Complexions cannot vertue breed or vice, 

Yet may they vnto both giue inclination, 

The Sanguin gamesome is, and nothing nice, 

Loues wine, and women, and all recreation. 

Likes pleasant tales, and newes, plaies cards and dice, 
Fit for all company, and euery fashion: 

Though bold, not apt to take offence, nor irefull, 

But bountifull and kind, and looking chearefull : 
Inclining to be fat and prone to lafter, 


143 


Loues myrth, and musicke, cares not what comes after. 


Sharpe Choller is an humour most pernitious, 
AII violent, and fierce, and full of fire, 

Of quicke conceit, and therewithal ambitious, 
Their thoughts to greater fortune still aspyre, 
Proud, bountifull enough, yet oft malicious, 
A right bold speaker, and as bold a lyer, 

On little cause to anger great inclin'd, 

Much eating still, yet euer looking pin'd, 

In younger yeares they vse to grow apace, 
In elder, hairy on their breast and face. 


The Flegmatique are most of no great growth, 
Inclining rather to be fat and square, 

Giuen much vnto their ease, to rest and sloth, 
Content in knowledge to take little share, 

To put themselues to any paine most loth, 

So dead their spirits, so dull their sences are: 
Still either sitting like to folke that dreame, 
Or else still spitting, to avoid the flegme, 
One quality doth yet these harmes repayre, 
That for most part the Flegmalique are fayre, 


144 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


The Melancholy from the rest do vary, 

Both sport, and ease, and company refusing, 
Exceeding studious, euer solitary, 

Inclining pensiue still to be, and musing, 

A secret hate to others apt to carry: 

Most constant in his choice, tho long a choosing, 
Extreame in loue sometime, yet seldom lustfull, 
Suspitious in his nature, and mistrustfull. 

A wary wit, a hand much giuen to sparing, 

A heauy looke, a spirit little daring. 


Now though we giue these humours seueral names, 
Yet all men are of all participant, 

But all haue not in quantity the same, 

For some (n some ) are more predominant, 

The colour shewes from whence it lightly came, 
Or whether they haue blood too much or want. 
The watry Flegmatique are fayre and white, 

The Sanguin, Roses joyn'd to Lillies bright, 

"The Chollericke more red : the Melancholy, 
Alluding to their name, are swart and colly. 


If Sanguin humour do too much abound, 

These signes will be thereof appearing cheefe, 

The face will swell, the cheeks grow red and round, 
With staring eies, the pulse beat soft and breefe, 
The veynes exceed, the belly will be bound, 

The temples, and the forehead full of griefe, 
Vnquiet sleeps, that so strange dreames will make 
To cause one blush to tell when he doth wake: 
Besides the moysture of the mouth and spittle, 

Will taste too sweet, and seeme the throat to tickle. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


1f Choller do exceed, as may sometime, 

Your eares will ring and make you to be wakefull, 
Your tongue will seeme all rough, and oftentimes 
Cause vomits, vnaceustomed and hatefull, 

Great thirst, your excrements are full of slime, 
The stomacke squeamish, sustenance vngratefull, 
Your appetite will seeme in nought delighting, 
Your heart still greeued with continuall byting, 
The pulse beat hard and swift, all hot, extreame, 
Your spittle soure, of fire-worke oft you dreame. 


If Flegme abundance haue due limits past, 

These signes are here set downe will plainly shew, 
The mouth will seeme to you quite out of taste, 
And apt with moisture still to ouerflow, 

Your sides will seeme all sore downe to the waist, 
Your meat wax loathsome, your disgestion slow, 
Your head and stomacke both in so ill taking, 
One seeming euer griping, tother aking : 

With empty veynes, the pulse beat slow and soft, 
In sleepe, of seas, and ryuers dreaming oft. 


But if that dangerous humour ouer-raigne, 
Of Melancholy, sometime making mad, 
These tokens then will be appearing plaine, 
The pulse beat hard, the colour darke and bad : 
The water thin, a weake fantasticke braine, 
False-grounded ioy, or else perpetuall sad, 
Affrighted oftentimes with dreames like visions, 
Presenting to the thought ill apparitions, 
Of bitter belches from the stomacke comming, 
His eare (the left especiall) euer humming. 

o 


145 


146 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 


Against these seuerall humours ouerflowing, 

As seuerall kinds of physicke may be good, 

As diet-drink, hot-baths, whence sweat is growing, 
With purging, vomiting, and letting blood: 
Which taken in due time, nor ouerflowing, 

Each maladies infection is withstood. 

The last of these is best, if skill and reason, 
Respect age, strength, quantity, and season ; 

Of seuenty from seuenteene, if blood abound, 

The opening of a veyne is healthfull found. 


Of Bleeding many profits grow, and great, 

The spirits and sences are renewed thereby, 

Though these mend slowly by the strength of meat, 
But these with wine restor'd are by and by: 

By bleeding, to the marrow commeth heat, 

It maketh cleane your braine, releeues your eie, 

It mends your appetite, restoreth sleepe, 

Correcting humours that do waking keepe: 

All inward parts and sences also clearing, 

It mends the voyce, touch, smell, taste, and hearing. 


Three speciall months, September, April, May, 

There are in which tis good to ope a veyne, 

In these three months the moon bears greatest sway, 
Then old or young, that store of blood containe, 
May bleed now, though some elder wizards say, 
Some daies are ill in these, I hold it vaine: 
September, April, May, haue daies a peece, 

That bleeding do forbid and eating Geese, 

And those are they forsooth of May the first, 

Of tother two the last of each are worst. 


THE SALERNE SCHOOLE. 147 


But yet those daies I graunt, and all the rest, 
Haue in some cases iust impediment, 

As first, if nature be with cold opprest, 

Or if the Region, Ile, or Continent, 

Do scorch or freeze, if stomacke meat detest; 
If Baths, or Venus, late you did frequent, 
Nor old, nor young, nor drinkers great, are fit, 
Nor in long sickness, nor in raging fit, 

Or in this case if you will venture bleeding, 
The quantity must then be most exceeding. 


When you to bleed intend, you must prepare 
Some needfull things both after and before, 
Warme water, and sweet oyle, both needfull are, 
And wine the fainting spirits to restore, 

Fine binding cloths of linen, and beware, 

That all that morning you do sleepe no more. 
Some gentle motion helpeth after bleeding, 

And on light meats a spare and temperate feeding. 
To bleed, doth cheare the pensiue, and remoue 
The raging furies bred by burning loue. 


Make your incision large, and not too deepe, 

That blood haue speedy yssue with the fume, 

So that from sinnewes you all hurt do keepe, 

Nor may you (as I toucht before presume) 

In six ensuing hours at all to sleepe, 

Lest some slight bruise in sleepe cause an apostume. 
Eat not of milke, nor ought of milke compounded, 
Nor let your braine with much drinke be confounded, 
Eat no cold meats, for such the strength impayre, 
And shun all misty and vnwholesome ayre. 


148 THE SALERNE SCHOOLE: 


Besides the former rules for such as pleases, 

Of letting blood to take more obseruation, 
Know in beginning of all sharpe diseases, 

Tis counted best to make euacuation : 

To old, to young, both letting blood displeases, 
By yeares and sickness make your computation; 
First in the Spring for quantity, you shall, 

Of blood take twice as much as in the Fall: 

In Spring and Summer, let the right arm blood, 
The Fall and Winter for the left are good. 


The Heart and Lyuer, Spring and Summer's bleeding; 
The Fall and Winter hand and Foot doth mend, 

One veyne cut in the hand doth helpe exceeding, 
Vnto the Spleen, voice, breast, and intrayles lend; 
And swages eriefes that in the heart are breeding: 

But here the Salerne Schoole doth make an end : 

And heere I cease to write, but will not cease 

To wish you live in health, and die in peace: 

And ye our Physicke rules that friendly read, 

God graunt that Physicke you may neuer neede, 


ADDITIONS 


TO THE 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM; 


FROM MANUSCRIPTS AND PRINTED EDITIONS. 


I. 


LT. 


ADDITIONS FROM VILLA NOVA'S COMMEN- 
TARY. 
FROM DIFFERENT MANUSCRIPTS. 
1. General and miscellaneous rules. 
2. Animals and parts of animals. 
3. Plants, many of which are taken from" Macer. 


ADDITIONS 


TO THE 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 


I. VERSES QUOTED BY VILLA NOVA IN HIS 
COMMENTARY, AS NOT MAKING PART OF 
THE POEM, BUT OF ANOTHER ORIGIN, AND 
WHICH WERE AFTERWARDS TAKEN INTO 
THE TEXT. 


To line 26. After salsa. 
Caseus ille bonus quem dat àvara manus. 
]. 30. After valitura, introduced by unde. 


Filia presbyteri jubet hoc pro lege teneri : 
Quod bona sunt ova hec, candida, longa, nova. 


]. 42. Venenum, juata illud metricum. 


Allia qui mane jejuno sumpserit ore, 
Hune ignotarum non ledet potus aquarum, 5 
Nec diversorum mutatio facta locorum. 


159 . ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


l]. 87. Truca, undé versus. 


Lucius est piscis, rex et tyrannus aquarum, 
A quo non differt Lucius iste parüm. 


l. 143. Generatur, juxta illud. 


Ventum spe rapis, si tu vis vivere rapis. 


1. 149. Culi. De isto ( Marathro) solent dari isti 


versus communes. 


Bis duo dat marathrum, febres fugat atque venenum 10 
Et purgat stomachum, lumen quoque reddit acutum. 


l. 152. Sanat, prout in his versibus. 


Gaudet hepar spodio, mace cor, cerebrumque musco, 
Pulmo liquoriciáà, splen cap. stomachusque galangà. 


l. 154. Saporat, juxta illud commune metrum. 


Sal primó poni debet, primóque reponi, 
Omnis mensa male ponitur absque sale. 15 


l. 194. Decorem—of Onions. 
Quidem superaddunt textui istos duos versus : 


ÀDDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 153 


Appositas perhibent morsus curare caninos, 
Si tritt cum melle priüs fuerint et aceto. 


]. 254. De ossibus. 


Ossa ducentena sunt atque quater duodenda. 


l. 959. Terra melan: aq: fleg. et aer sanguis, 
cole: ignis. 
Iste sensus eliam patet in his versibus. 


Humidus est sanguis, calet, est vis aeris illi, 

Alget, tumet, phlegma, illi vis fit aquosa. 20 
Sicca calet cholera, sic igni fit similata. 

Melancholia friget, sicca quasi terra. 


1.294. Queque. Notandum circa istud, quàd sicut 
hic ponuntur signa superabundantis sanguinis, ita 
quidam etiam ponunt signa superabundantie aliorum 
humorum sub istis versibus. 

Signa quidem superabundantis cholere sub istis 
versibus. 


Accusat choleram dextre dolor, aspera lingua, 
Tinnitus, vomitusque frequens, vigilantia multa, 
Multa sitis, pinguis egestio, torsio ventris. 25 
Nausea fit, morsus cordis.  Languescit orexis, 


154 ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Pulsus adest gracilis, durus, veloxque, calescens, 
Aret, amarescit, incendia somnia fingit. 


Signa veró superabundantis phlegmatis sub istis 
versibus. 


Phlegma supergrediens proprias in corpore leges, 

Os facit insipidum, fastidia crebra, salivas, — 30 
Costarum, stomachi, simul occipitisque dolores, 
Pulsus adest rarus, tardus, mollis, quoque inanis, 
Praecedit fallax phantasmata somnus aquosa. 


Signa veró superabundantis melancholie sub his 
versibus. 


Humorum pleno dum fzx in corpore regnat, 

Nigra cutis, durus pulsus, tenuis et urina, 35 
Sollicitudo, timor, tristitia somnia tetra, 

Acescunt ructus, sapor, et sputaminis idem, 

Levaque precipue tinnit et sibilat auris. 38 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 155 


II. SELECT ADDITIONS FROM DIFFERENT MA- 
NUSCRIPTS, SOME OF WHICH HAVE BEEN 
INTRODUCED INTO PRINTED EDITIONS. 


1. General and miscellaneous rules. 
2. Animals and parts of animals. 
3. Plants. 


1l. GzNERAr Rurzs. 


After 1l. 44. a&r, cloaca. 
Alteriusque rei corpus nimió inficientis. 39 


l]. 28. Infirmis inimica. 


Pone gule metas, ut sit tibi longior cetas, 40 
Ut medicus fatur, parcus de. morte levatur. 


l. 95.. Subtilis àn ore dieta. 


Non bibe non sitiens, et non comedas saturatus, 
Est sitis atque fames moderata bonum medicamen, 
Si super excedant important scpe gravamen. 


l. 21. Cena brevis. 


(er 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Coena brevis, vel ccena levis, fit raró molesta, 


Magna nocet, medicina docet, res est manifesta, 
Septem horis dormire sat est juvenique senique. 


. 14. Frigesce minute. 


45 


Fons, speculum, gramen, hec dant oculis relevamen, 


Mane igitür montes, sub serum inquirito fontes. 


. 134. Inflat. 


In die mictura vicibus sex fit naturalis, 
Tempore bis tali, vel ter, fit egestio pura. 


. 113. Nova. 


Swpe bibendo parüm pondus laxas epularum, 
Et liquor ipse tibi proderit, atque cibi. 


. 231. Ébrietasque. 


Post coenam stabis, aut passus mille meabis. 


. 07. DBruma. 


Pauperibus san: sunt esce quotidiana. 


. 19. Ista. 


50 


55 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 157 


Qui fluxum pateris, si non caveas, morieris, 
Concubitum, nimium potum, cum frigore, motum. 


1.35. Before Vixa probantur odore, sapore, vi- 
tore, colore. 


Omnis homo primum proponit nobile vinum, 
Inde quod deterius, pagina sacra docet. 


l. 105. De caseo. 
After Languent? stomacho caseus addit opem. 


Caseus ante cibum confert si defluat alvus, 60 
Ad fundum stomachi dum sumpta cibaria condit. 
Vim digestivam non minüs ille juvat. 

S1 stomachus languet, vel si minüs appetit, iste 

Fit gratus stomacho, consiliansque cibum. 

Si sit crustosus, per lucem non oculosus, 65 
Ejusdem sic onus dicitur esse bonus. 


l. 160. Unctus, et insipidus, dulcis, dant tempera- 
mentum. 


Dulcis. 
Humectat, lenit, bene nutrit, mundificatque. 


Salsus. 


Incidit, ingrossat, penetrat, sed proximus exit. 
P 


158 | ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 
Acetosus. 
Dicunt, infestat nervos, subtilia siccat. 
Ponticus. 
Comprimit, ingrossat, corrugat, stomachum citó laxat. 70 
Unctuosus. 
Lubricat, evellit, replet, supereminet ore. 
Amarus. 
Valde deopilat, confortat, pectora stringit. 
Acutus. 
Subtiliat, mordet, calet, urit, grossa resolvit. 


]. 34. Recentes. 


Lixa fovent, sed frixa nocent, assata coercent. 
Pane novo, veteri vino, si possit haberi, 75 
Carne frui juvene, consulo, pisce sene. 


]. 162. Abundat. 
Ingeniumque acuit, replet, minuit simul offa. 


or, 


Quod minüs est supplet, quod plüs est digerit offa. 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 159 


II. ANrMALS AND PARTS OF ÁNIMALS. 


]. 88. 4Amarellus. 
De Anate. 


O fluvialis anas, quantà dulcedine manas! 
Si mihi cavissem, si ventri frena dedissem, 80 
Tebres quartanas non renovasset anas. 


De Ansere. 


Auca sitit Coum mensis, campis Acheloum. 
Auca petit Bacchum mortua, viva lacum. 


]. 73. Medicina. 


Carnes porcin: cum cepis sunt medicinz. 


l1. 75. Ilia porcorum bona sunt, mala sunt reli- 


quorum. 


Cessat laus hepatis, nisi gallinz, vel anatis. 85 
Dissuadentur edi renes, nisi solius hdi. 

Splen quoque spleneticis est mansus szpe salubris, 
Corda cervorum removebit sella dolorum. 

Ut suillarum remotio tristitiarum. 

Ilia porcorum bona sunt, mala sunt reliquorum, 90 
Jam nisi natorum defunctà matre suorum. 


160 | ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


]l. 93. Novum. 


Non vult mentiri qui vult pro lege teneri, 
Quod bona sunt ova, candida, longa, nova. 
H«c tria sunt norma, vernalia sunt meliora. 


]. 91. Bibas. 


Caseus, anguilla, mortis cibus ille et illa, 95 
Ni bibas, et rebibas, et rebibendo bibas. 


and 


Non nocet anguilla vino si mergitur illa. 97 


III. Or PrawrTS, MosrLv rRowM Macrn. 


Faba. 


Manducare fabam caveas, parit illa podagram. 98 
In matribus faba lac spargit, mollitque capillos. 


]. 170. Olus, Cicer. 


Jus olerum cicerumque bonum, substantia prava. 100 





ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 101 


DBuglossa. 


Vinum potatum quo sit macerata buglossa, 
Mororem cerebri dicunt auferre periti. 
Fertur convivas decoctio reddere lztos. 
Dorrago. 
Dicit borrago gaudia semper ago. 
Cardiacos auffert borrago, gaudia confert. 105 
Pastinaca. 


Quód pastum tribuit est pastinaca vocata, 

Namque cibum null: radices dant meliorem. 
Attamen illa parüm nutrit quia non subacuta, 
Confortat coitum, non est ad menstrua muta. 


. 60. Absinthium. 


Confortat nervos, et causas pectoris omnes, 110 
Serpentes nidore fugat, bibitumque venenum, 
Auris depellit sonitum cum felle bovino. 


Abrotonum, 


Abrotono crudo stomachi purgabitur humor. 


Scabiósa. 


Urbanus per se nescit pretium scabiosz. 
Confortat pectus quod deprimit egra senectus. — 115 


PÓ 


169 . ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Lenit pulmonem, tollit laterumque dolorem. 

Succus potatur virus sic evacuatur. 

Emplastrata foris necat antracem tribus horis, 
Languorem pecudum tollit, dirimitque venenum, 
Rumpit apostema leniter. Ratione probatur. 120 


]. 149. Maratrum. 
Urinare facit, ventris flatusque repellit. 
or, 
Provocat urinam, faciet colicique ruinam. 
Semen cum vino sumptum Veneris movet actus, 


Atque senes ejus gustu juvenescere dicunt. 
Sic quoque pulmonis obstat, jecorisque querelis. 125 


Siler. 
Siler montanum non sit tibi sumere vanum. 


Dat lumen clarum, quamvis gustu sit amarum, 
Lumbricosque necat, digestivamque reportat. 


Spinachaa. 


De cholerà lzso spinachia convenit ori, 
Et stomachis calidis hujus valet esus amari. 130 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 1063 


Sambucus. 


Sambuci flores sambuco sunt meliores, 
Nam sambucus olet, flos redolere solet. 


Anethum et Coriandrum. 


Anethum ventos prohibet, minuitque tumores, 
Ventres repletos pravis facit esse minores. 
Confortat stomachum, ventum removit coriandrum. 135 


]. 34. Uva. 


Utilitas uvz, sine granis et sine pelle, 
Dat sedare sitim, jecoris cholerzeque dolorem. 


Mora. 


Mora sitim tollunt, recreant cum faucibus uvam. 


]. 130. Ficus. 


Pectus clarificant ficus, ventremque relaxant, 
Seu dantur cruda, seu fuerint bene cocta. 140 
Nutrit et impinguit, varios curatque tumores. 


]04 . ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Zingiber. 


Zingiber anté datum morbum fugat inveteratum, 
Postque datum mollit, ventris fastidia tollit, 
Emphraxes hepatis reserat, et menstrua stringit, 
Algores et stomachi, thoracis, renibus, aufert. 

Item conditum solamen zingiber affert. 145 


Zedoara. 


Tu me semper ama quod tibi do zedoara. 


1. 130. After tenet ossa. 


Tune cataplasma facis, cüàm succum ponis, et herbam. 


1l. 991. De salice. 


Hujus flos sumptus in aquá frigescere cogit : 
Instinctus Veneris cunctos acres stimulantes, 150 
Et sic desiccat ut nulla creatio fiat. 


1l. 925. For :sto still 


Porrwum. 


Manantemque potes naris retinere cruorem, 
Ungas si nares intüs medicamine tali. 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI 105 


Furfur, farina. 


Est cortex per se sicut furfura, mixta faring 
Grossior est simulà, subtilior ipsà fariná. 155 


. 90. Post. 


Salvia cum rutá faciunt tibi pocula tuta. 


Fortificatur opus si conjungatur hyssopus ;! 

Adde rosz florem gratum prestabit odorem. 
Gramatum. 

Sudorem profert granatum, lenit et alget. 


Presidia granati cortex, balaustia flos est. 


Glans et. Castanea. 


Ante cibum stringunt, post, glans castanea, sol- 
vunt. 160 


Olera veris. 


Omne virens veris tibi dicitur esse salubre, 
Et magis betonica, spinachia, brancaque radix, 
Lupilus et caules, petrocillz junge lapaces. 


166 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Olera Zstatis. 
Blitus cum bletá, violaria, crivolocauna, 


Ac triplices malvz, lactucz, portulacz, 
Sunt apium, rapa, sic blasia, pastinaca. 


Olera autumn. 


Dicit borrago gaudia semper ago. 
Cardiacos aufert borrago, gaudia confert. 


Olera hybermia. 


Nascitur in brumà cerifolia, petrocilina. 
Neptam, cretanos, cum cepis, addito porros. 


Caru:. 


Urinare facit carui, ventosque repellit. 
Dum carui carui non sine febre fui. 


Malangia. 


Semen nature malangia fertur acutz, 
Et choleram nigram viri non reddere pigram. 


165 


170 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 167 


Blitus. 


Aggravat blitus humores convenientes, 175 
Irrorat ptisicos, et compescit sitientes. 


Apium. 


Humores apium subitó totius adjuvat 
Corporis, ac capitis, vulvz, pueris epulum dat. 


Rosa. 


Curat hzemoroides rosa, semine cortice demptis. 
Gingivas, coligam capitis juvat ipsa dolentis. 180 


Lalia. 


Precisis nervis cum melle, combustaque membra, 
Vultás deducit rugas, maculas fugit oris. 


Levistica. 


Hepar opilatum frigore levistica mulcet. 


Sorsia. 


Sorsia ventosa medicine menstrua clausa. 


168 | ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Lactuca. 


Lac lactuca facit, scotisma, sperma minorat. 185 


Pinea. 


Tussim effimeras ethicam tibi pinea tollit. 
Mascula plus tussi valet, et passiva dolori. 


Liquoricia. 


Sit tibi contenta liquoricia pulverilenta. 

Pectus, pulmonem, venas, refovendo rigabit: 

Pellit namque sitim stomachi, nociva repellit. — 190 
Spiritibus cunctis sic subvenit ipsa strumosis. 


Gallia muscata. 


Gallia muscata confortat debilitata, 
Corda juvat, stomachum, oculi scotomaque tollit, 
Confortat stomachum, coitum quoque jungere cogit. 


Cuminum. 


Ventosum stomachumtibi tranquillatque cuminum, 195 
Et dat pallentem permansum ferre colorem. 


ADDITIONS TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 169 


Cicla. 


Cicla parum nutrit, ventrem constipat, et ejus 
Coctio si detur ventrem laxare probetur. 


Epilogus. 


Herbae dum florent, sumunt qu: sumere debent: 
S1 desint flores, radices sumere debes. 200 


A SPECIMEN 


OF 


THE ORIGINAL EXPOSITION 


OF 
ARNALDUS DE VILLA NOVA, 


From the beginning, from the edition of 1491, Strasburg. 


IsrE hbellus est editus à doctoribus Salerniensibus, 
in quo inscribuntur multa et diversa pro conserva- 
tione sanitatis humane. — Et editus est iste liber ad 
usum Regis Anglie. Et in textu lecto? auctor po- 
nit octo documenta generalia pro conservatione sani- 
tatis: de quibus postea specialiter per ordinem de- 
terminabitur. Primum ergo documentum est, quod 
homo sanus volens vivere debet ab eo removere 
graves curas. Nam cure exsiccant corpora, ex quo 
tristificant spiritus vitales ; modo spiritus tristes 


* From the word lecto it seems as if Villa Nova's exposition 
was delivered in lectures upon his author, of whom he first read 
a portion and then commented upon it. 


EXPOSITION OF VILLA NOVÁÀ. 171 


exsiccant ossa. Et sub isto documento etiam com- 
prehendi debent tristiti;e, quae similitér corpora ex- 
siccant et infrigidant, maciem et extenuationem 
inducunt, cor stringunt, et spiritum obtenebrant, 
ingenium hebebant, et rationem impediunt, judicium 
obscurant, et memoriam obtundunt, Veruntamen 
aliqui pingues et carnosi sunt, spiritus adeó nobiles 
et callidos habentes, quód eis interdum bonum est 
tristari, ut spiritüs calor hebetetur, et corpus aliqua- 
litér maceretur. 

Secundum documentum est, non irasci. Primo quiá 
ira similiter corpora exsiccat, cüm ipsa summe sin- 
gula membra supercalefaciat. | Nimia.autem cale- 
factio siecitatem inducit, teste Avic. i. doc. iil. c. 1. 
Secundó, quia ira, propter fervorem cordis, omnes 
actus rationis confundit. Advertendum tamen est, 
quod quidam frigidi sunt et maleficiati, quibus inter- 
dum irasci prodest in regimine sanitatis, ut in eis 
calor excitetur. 

Tertium est, parcé uti potu vini. Nimia enim 
repletio vini somnolentiam, pigritiam, debilitatem 
membrorum, debilitatem stomachi, et multa alia his 
similia, inducit. De quibus posteriüs magis patebit. 

Quartum est, parüm cenare. Quia nimia noc- 
turna repletio dolorem in ventre inducit, ac inquie- 
tudinem, insomneitatem, et angustiam : prout mani- 
ferta probat experientia, et inferiüs declarabitur. 


179 EXPOSITION OF VILLA NOVA. 


Quintum est, surgere post cibum sumptum, quod 
faeit ad digestionem, propterea quod cibum sump- 
tum facit descendere ad fundum stomachi, in quo 
viget virtus digestiva. 

.. Sextum est, non dormire post prandium. Cujus 
documenta postea tanguntur in textu ibi. Febris 
pigrities. 

Septimum est, non diu retinere urinam. Ex 
nimià enim urinz retentione aliquando sequitur difh- 
cultas mingendi, aut omninó prohibitio à mictu. Ut 
testatur Avi. xix. in trac. ii. c. De difficultate urinz. 
Similitér ex nimià retentatione foecali plura proveni- 
unt nocumenta. Indurantur enim feces in intestinis 
propter continuam suctionem venarum meseraicarum 
cum intestinis continuatarum, omnem humiditatem à 
fecibus sugentium, et sic remanent sicce. — Difheilis 
exitus intestina opilans. Ad quam opilationem, 
propter ventositatem, eductionis prohibitionem, et 
aliarum secum acervationem, sequuntur nocumenta 
in textu posterius posita. Ibi Spasmus, etc. 

Octavum est, non fortitér comprimere anum. Ex 
hoc enim sequitur tenasmon sive exitus longationis. 
Ulteriüs subdit autor, quod omnia ista debité con- 
servans longo tempore sanus vivere poterit. 


NOTES 


TO THE 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 


Line 9. Requies. Some copies read labor, but this is evidently 
wrong. 1t has often been observed, that rest and abstinence 
had cured many a fever before Hippocrates. 

l. 14. Lote, cale: sta, pranse, vel i: frisgesce minute. 

This line is not without its difficulties. Lote and pranse are 
vocative cases, ** after bathing keep yourself warm ; after dinner 
stand or walk gently," that the food may descend. The latter 
part has received three different interpretations. 

I. Taking minuté for an adverb, equivalent to paulatim, 
** When you are heated cool yourself gradually." It was thus 
understood by Villa Nova, though he has expressed it by the 
converse rule. Homo frigidus debet cavere ne subitó se cali- 
faciat, sed paulatim, mutationes enim subite naturam lzdunt. 

II. Considering minuié still as an adverb, and synonomóus 
with parüm or paulispér, and referring to what precedes, it 1s 
translated, ** after dinner keep yourself cool," that the natural 
heat may be repelled from the external to the internal parts of 
the body, to facilitate digestion. 

IIT. ** After bleeding keep yourself cool." Minute is then the 
vocative case of the participle of the verb minuo used by the 
medical writers, and the Schola for to bleed. In confirmation of 
this meaning some of the commentators have quoted Johannes 
Fernelius de vacuandi ratione, cap. ix. — Neque protinüs ioca 


Q3 


174 NOTES TO THE 


calidiora ingrediatur—quandoquidem sanguis et spiritus vehe- 
mentius incitati, ne dissipentur aut incalescant, sedandi com- 
premendique sunt. ^ Yet this seems contrary to the doctrine 
delivered afterwards in the Schola itself, 1. 331, Frigida vitabis, 
quia sunt inimica minutis, unless, in one case, a moderate cool- 
ness be understood, in the other, positive cold. Upon the 
whole I adhere to the third explication. 

l. 25. Dicta in some manuscripis is saliva.—But the old read- 
ing is to be preserved. An appetite, with slender diet prece- 
dent, are the signs that it is a real and not a false appetite, 
that the body requires food, and that it is not an artificial 
stimulus. "The original reading is followed in all the printed 
editions, and is considered as the best by all the commentators, 
who mention saliva by the by only, legitur nec malé quidem. 

Yet saliva gives a sense equally good, Galen (de Locis 
Affectis, lib. 8. cap. 6.) as quoted by the commentators, had 
observed that a saliva thin, watry, and free from any bad taste 
is a proof of health, and that the former food 1s concocted.— 
When a person is really hungry we say ** his mouth waters." 

l. 32. For cerebella, medulle, some MSS. have prosunt domi- 
nabus. 

1. 33. Ova sorbilia, dressed soft. 

1. 37. Frisca—this word is explained by Villa Nova, frothing 
and sparkling, quod spumando sonum facit, sive quando in eo 
moventur atomi. In English frisky, from the German frisch: 
fresh not dead, consequently lively. Ital. Frizzare, to be 
lively. 

l. 45. Scerotina, probably scerotini. 

l1. 50. Bené lymphatum, mixed with water. Altered to dilu- 
tum in some later editions. 

1. 51. Cerevisia, quasi Cere risia, derived from Ceres, was 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 175 


known to Virgil. Georg. iii. 380; to Tacitus, Germania, xxiii ; 
and to Pliny, lib. xiv. 

l. 60. Nausea. 

Villa Nova understands this of sea water. Hence it has 
been altered in some editions to, 


Nausea non poterit heec quem vexare, marinam 
Undam cum vino mixtam qui sumpserit anté. Sylvius, etc. 


But these two lines are taken from Macer, lib. i. sect. 3, who 
applies them to A4bsinthium, wormwood, as they are understood 
by Moreau. 


Nausea non potuit quemquam vexare marina, 
Anteà commistam vino qui sumpserit istam. 


No doubt Absynthium was intended. "The error of Villa 
Nova, and from him of the other commentators, has arisen 
from the omission of the name of the plant in the text, and the 
want not being supplied by the title De Absynthio put at the 
head of the article, as has been done for the same reason to 
Urtica and other plants, in lines 199, 206, 212, 214, 217, 219, 
224. Moreau found this title in some of his manuscripts. With- 
out something to refer to, the sense and grammar are defective. 
That Istam or illam are in the feminine, though referring to 
Absynthium, is no objection. It is so in Macer, whose ad- 
jectives all the way through that article refer to Absynthii 
herba. It begins, 

In primo calor est gradu, vis sicca secundo 
Dicitur Absynthi, stomachum corroborat herba 
Illius, quocunque modo quis sumpserit illam. 


Moreau justly observes, that sea water was never recom- 
mended for this purpose, and is more likely to disorder the 


176 NOTES TO THE 


stomach, and to produce, rather than to cure, sea sickness. 
Wormwood was prescribed by Macer, and is calculated, by its 
astringent qualities, to fortify the stomach. 

1. 63. Salsa, sauce. Ital. 

1. 68. Occulatus, full of eyes. The Italians speak of the occhi 
and lagrime of Parmasan cheese, the holes full of a rich liquor. 

1.77. Emphraxim, obstructions in the liver and spleen: 
from euópacco. 

1. 82. Ethigoneta. "The bird designated by this strange word 
is described by Villa Nova as, Avis parva ad modum perdicis, 
Sed longum rostrum habens, cujus caro est optima. This 
answers to a woodcock, as it is translated by Philemon Holland. 
By others it is supposed to be a corruption of Ortygometra, as 
it appears in many manuscripts, and all the later editions. 'T'his 
word is first found in Aristotle (De Hist. Animal. lib. viii. cap. 
12. or 14.) oprvysc—órav svrevÜsv amaugocw, cvvaatgtt 1) 
oprvyop1roa. 'H 6s oprvyoynrpa vaga noc rq9v uopoagv rotc 
Autvatowc ec7t, Pliny, (lib. x. cap. 23.), and Solinus (Polyhist. 
cap. 18.) have only copied Aristotle, Athenzus (Deip. lib. 9.) 
says, that it is of the size of a dove, with long legs, of a slender 
body, and a timid nature. Hesychius explains it by oprvé 
vzepueysÜnc, a very large quail. And Alberti in his edition 
(tom. ii. p. 790.5, refers to Ludolph. comment. in Hist. /Ethiop. 
p. 169. Bochart, Hierozoicon part. ii. lib. i. cap. 14. p. 93. It 
occurs in the Septuagint for the quails sent to the Israelites in 
the wilderness, Exodus chap. xii. v. 18, etc. See Biel. Lex. 
Kat eyevero éomtpa, kav avem oporvyounroa, kat tkaXwwe 
759v vaosuDoXqv. 

Of the moderns, Aldrovandus says it is i! Re delle quaglie, or 
Roy des Cailles, and gives a figure of it, which 1s that of a large 
quail. Camus, the French translator of Aristotle, renders it 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 127 


caille mere. By Willoughby and Gesner it is supposed to be 
the land-rail, or the daker hen. Lastly Pennant (Brit. Zool. 
vol. ii. p. 410.) concludes that it is the crake, or daker hen, 
which is found in corn, etc. and migrates before winter, the 
Rallus Crex of Linnzus. 

With respect to the other animals mentioned in the Schola 
Salerni, I have explained merely the names of such as not being 
of classical authority might occasion some difficulty, without 
troubling the reader with the process from which I formed the 
conclusions. t is, however, difficult and uncertain in many 
cases to ascertain the animal really designed.  Quiscula, is a 
quail, Villa Nova says it is Nomen onomatopoeion from its cry. 
Orez Or otis, either a moor-hen, a wood-hen, or otis tarda, a 
bustard—according to Aldrovandus, Willoughby, Gesner, and 
Linngus. — Trigellus, à. chaffinch, frigilla ; tremulus, a plover ; 
amarellus, a teal. 

l. 86. So of the fishes, savaulis, or saxatilis, is a sole; 
albica, a whiting ; sornus, or gurnus, a gurnet; plagitia, a 
plaice; galbio, a ray ; others are only slightly altered from 
the classical names, as parca, for perca ; tenca, for tinca. 

Ackermann has given the supposed Linnzan names of these 
birds and fishes ; and we may say of some of them, as the 
gentleman does in the farce, that the interpreter is the more 
difficult to understand of the two. 

Sturna, sturnus vulgaris ; quiscula, coturnix, Merula, turdus 
Merula ; frigellus, turdus lliacus ; orex, tetrao bonasia; tre- 
mulus, motacilla alba; amarellus, mergus. So of the fishes, 
lucius, esox lucius ; perca, perca fluviatilis ; saxaulis, cobitis 
barbatula ; albica, gadus morrhua ; tinca, Cyprinus tinca; 
plagitia, pleuronectes platessa ; carpa, Cyprinus carpio ; ealbio, 
raja; truta, salmo fario. 


178 NOTES TO THE 


1. 88. Vocibus. See line 243. 

l.90. The line, Inter prandendum sit sepé parumque biben- 
dum, is placed here in all the old editions, but as it is repeated 
at line 110, which is more appropriate to it, I have omitted it 
here. 

1. 96. Ethicis, that is $0icwcoic, i. e. consumptis, et mace- 
ratis, vel habentibus febrem ethicam. Vill. Nov.  Hectic 
persons. 

l. 102. Grossus, that is, produces gross humours, Quod ex 
grossiori et terrestriori parte lactis sit, Vill. Nov. From grosso, 
Ital. from the Latin crassus. 

l. 105. Cheese is here personified, and addresses the reader. 

These lines appear thus in some editions, the last two are 


found in some manuscripts, 


Expertis reor esse ratum, quia commoditate 
Languenti stomacho caseus addit opem. 

Caseus ante cibum confert si defluat alvus, 
S1 constipetur, terminet ille dapes. 


l. 108. Si post sumatur. 

This line at first seems tautology, but itis explained by Villa 
Nova to mean, that *«cheese perfects the meal if taken last, 
by promoting digestion," by causing the food to descend where 
digestion is active, that is, the bottom of the stomach. This 
doctrine is taken from Rhazes, Caseum ultimo post alios cibos 
loco ingestum roborare os ventriculi, atque auferre ávops£iav 
ac nauseam qua ex dulcibus et pinguibus cibis proveniant. 

l. 115. Unica. 

Villa Nova, and other commentators, understand the first nut 
to be the nutmeg, the second the walnut, and the third deadly 
nut, to be the nut of a cross-bow, or the nut mechel, which is 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 179 


said by Avicenna to be poison. But I am inclined to think 
that the verse means only that a few nuts may be wholesome, a 
larger quantity hurtful, and excess may be fatal; using a defi- 
nite for an indefinite number. "There is a well known Greek 
proverb. Aic kpáp9r Oávaroc. 

The nut of a cross-bow is the projection or hook upon which 
the string was hitched when the bow was charged, and from 
which it was discharged, as Dante says 


E forse in tanto in quanto un quadrel posa, 
E vola, e dalla noce si dischiava. Paradiso, line 23, 


l. 117. Fert, an ingenious friend of mine proposes to read, 

Est pyra nostra pyrus—and that it is a quibble, the pear is 
our funeral pile, or death, nobis exitiosa. 

l. 129, Scrofa, for scrofula. Foris, outwardly applied (cata- 
plasmate, Vill. Nov.). ** Confracta foris tenet ossa," it knits 
broken bones. Other copies have ** foris trahit ossa" , draws out 
splinters from broken bones. Sed cuilibet obstat, produces bad 
blood. 

l. 133. Escula for mespila, medlars. ^ Unripe they are as- 
tringent, and so good, particularly roasted, or otherwise dressed. 
Ripe they are laxative, as well as better tasted, and so better. 

l. 134. Solvit, ventrem sciliét. 

l. 138. Infrigidat. 


In desiccando vis frigida constat aceto. MAczn, l. 98. 


l. 139. Infrigidat, macerat, melan: dat, sperma minorat, for 
melancholiam. 

l. 143. Tortio, ventris tormina. 

l]. 145. Similitér stomachus, melior sit in extremitates. 


180 NOTES TO THE 


The stomach is equally hard of digestion, but the extremities 
that 1s the bottom, and orifice, as being more fleshy, are more 
digestible. 

In some printed editions, 


Sic quoque ventriculus, tamen exteriora probantur. 


l1. 149. Semen, called marathrum, uapa0pov. Expels wind, 
Vill. Nov. The place emitting for the thing emitted. 

l. 152. Spodium, according to Avicenna, was the roots of 
canes or reeds burnt, for which burnt bones were sometimes 
substituted. 

l. 158. Three triads of the qualities of bodies from the taste. 
Hot: salt, bitter, pungent. Cold: sour, rough, astringent. In- 
termediate or temperate: fat, insipid, sweet. — Ponticus 1s astrin- - 
gent, as the taste of acorns, etc. à pungendo, or from radix 
Ponticus, rhubarb. 

1.161. Vippa, or vipa, a wine-sop, compounded of vinum 
and panis. Offa is à sop in broth, etc. 

l. 162. minus est implet, minuit quod abundat. 

By digesting food it nourishes the body; by digesting super- 
iuous and vitious humours it expels them. — A MS. pas lumen, 
comfortat quod. minus est, adipem dat. 

l. 165. Hippocras. 

In Aphorism, Sect. iu. Aph. 50, Ta sk zoÀXov xpovov 
£vyq0ca, kv ey xeu, rov a£vviyÜsov 10cov svoxAstv. suvOs, 
and De Victus Ratione in Morb. acut., lib. i. Aphor. 21, 22. 

Meta medicine, the object, scopus. 

]. 172. Dixerunt, 


Dixerunt malvam nostri quod molliat alvum. 
Maczn, No». 70. 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 181 


l1. 176. Lumbricosque modo depellere fertur eodem. 
Maczn, N?. 25. 
l. 177. Our ancestors highly esteeraed the virtues of sage. 
Chaucer in the Knight's Tale says, 


Sundry (had) fermacis of hearbes, and eke save 
They dronken, for they would her lives have. 


Fermacis, 1. e. pharmacies, medicines— Save, salvia, sage. 

l. 181. Premula veris, the primrose. 

1. 182. Nastur : for nasturtium. 

l. 187. Astum, that 1s, astutiam. 

l. 189. Galenus, lib. ii. De aliment. facultat, ch. 71, IIep 
kpoupv ov, ekopoÓwv, k. T. X. Oepuawvet 0e ro cua, kat Aer rvvec 
TOUVC EV QUT(Q 7raXEtC XVHoUC, kat TEJ.vel TOUC yu xpovc. 


De cepis medici non consentire videntur, 
Namque Dioscorides inflare, caputque gravare, 
Atque sitim cepas dicit succendere mansas. 
Fellitis non esse bonas, ait ipse Galenus, 
Phlegmaticis veró multàm putat esse salubres. 
Non modicüm sanas, Asclepius! asserit illas, 
Praesertim stomacho, pulchrumque creare colorem 
Affirmat 
Contritis cepis, loca denudata capillis 
Szpé fricans poteris capitis reparare decorem. 

Maczn, N?. 26. 





l. 195. Sinapi. 
Quartus ei gradus est in vi siccà, calidàque. 
Maczrn, N». 27. 


! Asclepiades in Pliny, lib. xx. cap. v. 
R 


182 NOTES TO THE 


l. 197. Vola. 


Crapula discutitur bibitu, capitisque gravedo 
Olfactu solo 
Purpuream dicunt violam curare caducos. 
Maczn, N?. 33. ' 


1. 199. . Urtica. 


lilius semen colicis cum melle medetur, 
Et tussim veterem curat si szepe bibatur. 
Frigus pulmonis pellit, ventrisque tumorem, 
Omnibus et morbis sic subvenit articulorum. 
Maczn, N?. 4. 


1. 205. Hyssopus. 


Vultibus eximium fertur prestare colorem. 
Maczn, N?. 21. 


1. 206. Cevefolium. Chervil. 1tal. Cerfoglio. ' 


Appositum cancris tritum cum melle medetur. 
Cum vino bibitum lateris sedare dolorem 
Swpé solet 
Sepe solet vomitum, ventremque tenere solutum. 
Maczn, N?. 30. 





1. 209. Enula campana, elicampane. 


Cum succo rutz si succus sumitur ejus, 
Affirmant ruptis quod prosit potio talis. 
Macznz, N?. 20. 


SCHOLA SALEKNI. 183 


l. 212. Pulegium, penny royal. 


Cum vino nigram choleram potata repellit.— 
Appositum viridem dicunt sedare podagram. 
Maczn, N?. 13. 


]. 214. Nasturtium, water cresses. 


Illius succus crines retinere fluentes 
Allitus asseritur, dentisque levare dolorem. 
Lichenas succus purgat cum melle perunctus, 
Maczn, N?. 65. 


l. 217. Cheledonia, celandine. 


Cacatis pullis hàc lumina mater hirundo 
(Plinius ut scribit) quamvis sint eruta reddit. 
Maczn, N?. 56. 


Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 1. Animalia quoque invenire herbas, 
imprimisque chelidoniam. Hàc enim hirundines oculis pullo- 
rum in nidis restituunt visum, ut quidam volunt, etiam erutis 
oculis. 

l. 219. Auribus infusus vermes succus necat ejus. 

"This line is in Macer, applied to Feniculum, fennel; and 
again to Hyoscyomus, Henbane, N95, 14. and 68. 

1. 221. Pomorum. Villa Nova explains it, that the juice of 
the fruit, and the flowers of the sallow, are injurious to child- 
birth, which they render difficult by their styptic and drying 
qualities, Dut see the additions, 1. 149, which form part of 
the text in Moreau, Silvius, etc. 

1. 224. Porrum., | 


184 NOTES TO THE 


Manantemque potest naris retinere cruorem 
Intüs si nares ungas medicamine tali. 
Contractas vulvas succo curabis eodem, 


Reddit foecundas mansum persepé puellas. 
Macznz, N?, 11. 


1022 1 PIDE 


Vim digestivam stomachi, jecorisque juvabit. 
Occurrit variis thoracis spé querelis, 


Quódque movere solet, frigora periodica febris 
Compescit. Maczn, N^: 71. 


1. 230. ——— — — nimisque moveri. 
Villa Nova says, aliqui textus loco nimis habent minüs. 
l. 2833. In aure. 


Sciendum est quod aliqui textus adhuc habent istum versum. 
Balnea, sol, vomitus, affert, repletio, clamor. 


i. e. that is, affert timnitum in aure. Villa Nova. 

1. 236. Acumina, tart or sharp things, as sauces. 

l. 241. Most of the old copies have jure, but this is evidently 
an error for thure, embotwm 1s a. funnel. 

1. 245. Caleas dape, take warm food. ^ Inspira calidum, 
breathe warm air. Comprime flatum, hold your breath. 

l1. 249. The Greek words karappoc, payxoc, kopvza. 

1. 250. This is the only recipé of a chemical professional 
nature. 

Causa est quod in istis est virtus exsiccativa, et mundifica- 
tiva. Villa Nova. 

l. 254. 219 bones, 32 teeth, 365 veins. 


SCHOLA SALERNI. 185 


Villa Nova says, Secundum tamen solennes medicinz doc- 
tores, ut Hippocrates, Galenus, Rasis, Averroes, et Avicenna, 
ossa hominis sunt ducenta et quadraginta octo, licét in parti- 
culari enumeratione ossium disconveniant, et istud vult ille 
communis versus, 


Ossa ducentena sunt atque quater duodena. 


1. 259. Terra melan : aq: phleg : et aer sanguis : cole: ignis. 
The words of this line are apocopized to bring them into the 
verse, and must thus be scanned, 


Terra me—lan : aq:—phleg: et a— er san—guis: cole:—ignis, 


for terra melancholicis, aqua phlegmaticis, et aér sanguineis, 
colericis ignis (comparatur). 
This contracted line was expanded into 


Terra melancholicis, aqua confertur pituitz, 
Aer sanguineis, ignea vis cholera. 


The difference in colour between venal and arterial blood is 
mentioned by Villa Nova. Color est rubeus ; scilicét, venalis 
rubeus obscurus, et arterialis rubeus clarus. 

1.266. The number here changes from the plural to the 
singular, but this nothing in such inaccurate writers. So in 
the three following paragraphs. 

1.304. "This passage would be perfectly plain if the two 
lines, Hi sunt and In quibus, were placed at the beginning be- 
fore T'res insunt istis—'* those three months are good for bleed- 
ing, except three days, which are as destructive as a serpent, 
and neither bleeding, or eating a goose, is proper." Why either 
these months, or days, are called lunar is not explained. As 

R3 


186 NOTES TO THE SCHOLA SALERNI. 


to not eating a goose on those days, Villa Nova supposes it to 
be derived from some Jewish superstition, and that the pro- 
scribed days may be as good for bleeding as any others, if the 
stars are favourable. 

l. 316. Et fastiditi, 1f the stomach is squeamish. 

1. 319. Oiling and rubbing the part, or the lancet, or the 
wound. Drinking wine to promote the flow of blood, bathing 
the fillet, gentle motion. 

l]. 340. Cepha : by apocope for keóaXq. 

l. 342. Salvatella is a branch of the axillary vein, passing 
over the back of the hand, between the ring finger and middle 
finger, according to Villa Nova. "The benefit of bleeding this 
vein was much recommended by Avicenna, and the other Ara- 
bian physicians. 

1. 349. Morella is solanum hortense, garden nightshade. 


Istud idem dicunt capitis sedare dolorem. Maczn, No. 67. 


l. 350. Siccant for siccescant, grow dry. 


NOTES TO THE ADDITIONS. 


Line 4. Allia. 'Fhese three lines are in Macer, lib. 1. N^: 5. 

1l. 7. Lucius. 

These two lines, with some alteration, are taken from an 
epigram upon pope Lucius the third, who was banished from 
Rome by the magistrates and people, for his tyranny. He 
reigned from 1181 to 1185, and consequently the lines were 
written long after the Schola Salernitana. 


Lucius est piscis, rex et tyrannus aquarum : 
A quo discordat Lucius iste parüm. 
Devorat ille homines, hic piscibus insidiatur: 
Esurit hic semper, ille aliquando satur. 
Amborum vitam si laus zequata notaret, 
Plus rationis habet qui ratione caret. 


l. 183. Cap. by apocope for cappari, capers. 
l. 17. Appositas perhibent, etc. verbatim in Macer, N?: 26. 
l. 21. Sicca calet cholera, sic igni fit similata. 

A;gid. Corboil. Ignea vis cholerz, lib. iii. 1. 536. p. 596. 
l1. 40. Pone gule metas, ut sit tibi longior «tas. 

ZEgid. Corboil. lib. ii. 1. 440. p. 555. 
Intraque duorum 
Annorum metas ipsius clauditur ztas, 


and lib. iv. l. 466. p. 650. 


188 NOTES TO THE ADDITIONS. 


Vim chronicis morbis, quos fundat longior ztas, 
.Iugerit, et propriüs compellat stringere metas, 


l. 48. In the Italian translation these lines are adopted into 
the text : 


Un rio, un lago, un fonte, un fiumicello, 

Un specchio, un prato, e qual si sia verdura, 
À gli occhi dan conforto, e al cervello. 

La mattina nei monti é la pastura 
Degli occhi, e verso sera cercherai 

Fonti e ruscelli, per colli, o per pianura. 


1. 54. So the English proverb, 


After dinner sit a while 
After supper walk a mile. 

1. 77. Ingeniumque acuit, replet, minuit quoque, offa. 

"This seems a contradiction. It may either mean, that by in- 
creasing good humours it lessens the bad ones, or it may refer 
to two different kinds of sop, that in soup, which 1s nourishing, 
or in water, which starves the body, or it is better explained by 
the other reading. 

1. 91. For defunctá, some MSS. have sugendo—de siccá— 
sunt auctio. 

l1. 98. Fabis. 

Macer says they are good for the gout, if mixed with fat- and 
applied externally. 


Anseris adjuncta huic pinguedo recens, vel ovilla 
Si fuerit, podagra quoque subvenit hàc ratione. 
Maczn, 86. 


1. 101. Buglossa, 


NOTES TO THE ADDITIONS. 189 


Vinum potatum, quo sit macerata buglossa, 
Laetos convivas decoctio dicitur ejus 
Reddere, si fuerit inter convivia sparsa. Maczn,.47. 


l. 104. Borrago. 
Cardiacos. Quiin syncopen delabuntur, qui corde laborant. 


]. 106. Pastinaca. 


Quod pastum tribuit est pastinaca vocata, 


Namque cibum nullae radices dant meliorem. 
Maczn, N». 28. 


Non subacuta al. quum subacuta. 
Coitum, al. stomachum—muta. al. tuta. 


110. Absinthium. 


Unde juvat nervos, et causas pectoris omnes, 

Serpentes nidore fugat, bibitumque venena 

Illorum extinguit. Macrn, N?. 2, de Abrotono. 

Auris de pellit sonitum cum felle bovino. Maczn, 3. 


[er] 
e. 


l. 121. Maratrum, seu faniculum. 


Semen cum vino bibitum ventris movet actus. 
Tradunt auctores ejus juvenescere gustu 
Serpentes, et ob hoc senibus prodesse putatur. Maczn, 14. 


l. 131. Sambuci. 
This resembles the known epitaph upon fair Rosamond. 


Hic jacet in tumbà rosa mundi non rosa munda, 
Non olet sed redolet quz redolere solet. 


Ifthis line was borrowed from the epitaph, it was of course 
written long subsequent to the Schola. 


190 NOTES TO THE ADDITIONS. 


l. 184. Ventres, ventis in quibusdam MSS. 

]. 138. Uvam, 1. e. uvulam. 

l. 142. Zingiber. Some manuscripts apply this to zedoary. 
l. 149. De Salice. 


Hujus flos sumptus in aqua frigescere cogit 
Instinctus Veneris cunctos acres stimulantes, 
Et sic desiccat ut nulla creatio fiat. Maczn, 91. 


]. 152. De Porro. 

Manantemque— 

These two lines are verbatim in Macer, 91. 
1. 158. Granatum. 


BaXavcrtov, the flower of a pomegranate. 


]. 166. Blasia, pastinaca, —Bancia pastiquenata. MS. 
1-381.  Tifoas 
This is a strange jumble of several lines in Macer, N^: 17. 


Przcisis nervis tritus cum melle medetur.— 
Mollescunt nervi, combustaque membra juvantur.— 
Ruges distendit, vultüs maculas fugat omnes. 


1. 185. Lactuca. 


Lac dat abundantér nutrici sumpta frequenter. | 
Ut quidam dicunt oculis caligo creatur. - Maczn, 15. 


l. 186. Pinea, 
Effimeras. 'E$' »puepac, daily or habitual. 


1. 192. Gallia muscata. Galla, seu nux moschata. "The 
nutmeg. 


NOTES TO THE ADDITIONS. 191 
]. 194. Cuminum. 


Assumptum quocunque modo depellere tradunt 
Viscera vexantem ventum, stomachumque gravatum. 
Dicunt pallentem dare mensum sape colorem. 


Maczn, 74. 


1. 204. Cicla, the beet, beta, blitum, bleta. | French bette. 














" Du TE DET 
' 7T. Mor S 
| ' j APT 
ul 
I 
rr 
LM 4 
ut" ul Tell. i 
Á i 
. 
i 
Jj ne 
. 
]w 
I 
] 
t 1 
ha 
ü t 

3 D J 
iU à 1 ] 

] L2 J D 

4 . m ^ 





ANALYTICAL INDEX 


TO THE 


REGIMEN SANITATIS SALERNITANUM. 


O?0ev oÜroc ob0à sükonorov, ot0i kaXóv, üvOporou y (Gio, 


voc 7 TAZIX. 


I OF THE ANATOMY 
AND CONSTITUTION 
OF THE BODY. 


line 
Of the bones 254 
Of the teeth 255 
Of the veins 256 
Of the humours— 257 
Of the sanguine 260 
Of the choleric 268 
Of the phlegmatic 274 
Of the melancholy 290 


II. OF THE MEANS OF 
PRESERVING HEALTH. 


I. BY GENERAL RULES. 


At rising, to wash, walk, 
stretch, comb, and clean 
the teeth 10 


Of cleanliness 10, 64 
Of bathing 14, 234, 3598, 362 


XzrwNornz. CEcowv. 


II. BY ATTENTION TO THE SIX 


NON-NATURALS. 


1l. Of air and the seasons. 
line 


Of air 


Ofthe four seasons — 54, 850 


2. Of exercise, motion, and rest. 


Exercise 357 
Rest 963 
Not to move after meals 230 
To walk after dinner 14 


3. Of sleep, and. watching. 


5, 15 
230 
199 

297, 245 


Not to sleep at noon 
Not to sleep after meals 
To procure sleep 
Of watching 


4. Of repletion and. evacuation. 


Not to retain evacuations 6 
Not to retain wind 18 
S 


194 


line 
Foecation after apples 121 
Urine 76, 132, 197, 184, 142 


Fasting (see food) 350 
Vomiting 351 
Purging 357 
Perspiration ib. 
Bleeding— 


After bleeding keep warn 14 
Rules for bleeding—its benefits, 
time for, age, constitution, 
how, in what cases, etc. 205 


Salvatella, a vein 242 
5 Of the passions. 

To avoid care and anger 3 

Fear 292 


6. Of food, generally. 


Of long hunger 232 
To sup sparingly 4, 20 
To leave the table early S) 


After dinner stand or walk 14 
Not to eat till the stomach is 

empty 22 
Pleasant food good 93 
Rules for eating in the four 


seasons o4 
Sauce 62, 154 
Salt ib. 
Qualities of salt, bitter, sharp, 

sour,  astringent things, 

etc. 158 

Of food, in particular. 
Of bread. 
Fine 30, 31 


ANALYTICAL INDEX. 


line 
Good 67 
Crust 70 
With cheese 108 
Sops 161 
Of meats. 
Salt meat 26 
Venison 27 
Hare ib. 
Goat 1b. 
Deef ib. 
Pork 32, 73 
Veal 980 
Of parts and proceeds of 
animals. 
Milk 26, 31, 96 
Butter 100 
Cheese 26, 31, 90, 102, 114 
Whe 101 
Eggs 29, 33, 92, 113 
Honey 204, 206, 216 
Testicles 32 
Brains 32, 148 
Marrow 932 
Bowels 75 
Heart 144 
Stomach 145 
Tongue 146 
Lungs 147 
Of birds. 
Hens 91, 148 
Capons ib. 
'The turtle ib. 
The starling ib. 


ANALYTICAL INDEX. 195 
line Of plants. 

The dove 81 jr 
The quail 82 line 
The thrush ib. | Garlic 41, 62, 234 
The pheasant ib.| Rue . 41, 58, 184, 210, 238 
Ethigoneta ib. | Radishes 4l 
The partridge 83 | Sage 58, 62, 177, 181 
The chaffinch ib.| Roses 59, 238 
The moorhen, etc. ib. | Wormwood 60 
The plover ib. | Pepper 62, 226, 294 
The teal ib. | Parsley 62 
Pease 93 
Po 130 
Of fishes. Cm 141 
Fennel 149, 238 
The pike 96 | Anise 150 
The perch ib. | Cabbage 170 
The sole ib. | Mallows 172 
The whiting ib. | Mint 175 
The tench ib. | Lavender 181 
The gurnet 87 | Primrose ib. 
The plaice ib. | Nasturtium 182 
The carp ib. | Tansy ib. 
The ray ib. | Onions 189, 235 
The tront ib. | Mustard 195, 235 
Eels 98, 90, 244 | Violet 197 
Nettle 199 
Hysso 208 
Of fruits. Chervil 206 
Elicampane 209 
Peaches 26, 126 | Penny-royal 219 
Apples 26, 244 | Nasturtium 214 
Pears 26, 41, 117 | Celandine 217, 238 
Figs 34 | Sallow 219 
—cataplasm of 129 | Saffron 222 
Grapes 34 | Leek 224, 235, 240 
Nuts, 41, 114, 127, 243 | Lentils 235 
Cherries 122 | Beans ib. 
Plums 125 | Vervain 238 
Raisins 128 | Henbane 241 


196 
Of drink. 


: line 
Of wine 234 
Of drunkenness 231, 233, 345 


Of surfeit 197 
Of temperance 4, 963 
To drink often at dinner 110 


ANALYTICAL INDEX. 


line 
nence, supply the place of a 
physician 8 
Of diet, an usual diet not to be 
changed 168 


Of wine— Of medicines and physicians, etc. 
Red 29, 39 
White 38 | Spodium 152 
Black 48 | Castoreum 181 
Sweet 33, 38 | Thus, or jus 241 
Good, proofs of 35, 49 | Embotum, a funnel 242 
With wormwood 61 [O1 243 
With pork 78 | Orpiment, sulphur, lime | 250 
With eggs 113 | Treacle 41 
With cheese 90 | Hippocrates 165 
With eels ib. | Galen 190 
With pears 116 | Pliny 918 
With chervil 207 
With penny-royal 212 
In sauce 62 Of particular diseases. 
Bad for the eyes 234 


Of drinking wine next day 45 


water 945 

Of must, or new wine 76, 126, 
184 

Water, hurtfulat eating — 78 


Of ale— 
Good, is not stale, clear, 


brewed of good corn, 51 
Qualities of ale 135 
Of Vinegar 138, 220 


III. OF THE CURE OF 
DISEASES. 


General rules. 


Cheerfulness, rest, and absti- 


Offever 16, 100, 180, 229, 346 
Of slothfulness 16 
Of head ache 16, 197, 345 
Of catarrh, cough,  colds, 
phlegm, 16, 128, 200, 208, 
09 15:220 

Various sorts, rheuma, catarr- 
hus, bronchus, coryza 245 


Of spasms 19 
Of dropsy ib. 
Of cholic 19, 200 
Of vertigo ib. 


Of the belly, 40, 76, 132, 137, 
143, 171, 172, 201, 208, 209 
Of the stomach, 107, 120, 123, 
141, 150, 192, 201, 203, 228 
Of the voice 40, 88 


Guide Dt INDEX. 197 

line line 

Ofpoison 41, 116, 154, 197 | Ofthe teeth 12, 142, 161, 215, 
Of sea. sickness 60 402 
Of urine 6, 76, 132, 134, 137, | Of the melancholy 26 
142 | Of the choleric 70, 190, 212, 

Of obstruction of the liver 360 
: 71, 223 | Of the phlegmatic [1917997 
Of the stone 71, 124 | Of the hair 12, 193, 214 
Of consumption 96 | Of the head 196 
Of good blood 124 | Of surfeit 197 
Of the spleen 77, 128 | Of the falling sickness 198 
Of the reins ib. | Of vomiting 199, 208, 232 
Of scrofula 129 | Of the lungs 201, 204 
Of tumours 129 | Of the joints 202, 204 
Of the glands ib. | Of the face 192, 205 
Of bones broken 130 | Of cancer 206 
Of pediculi 131 | Of ruptures 211 
Of Venus 131, 186, 234, 236, | Of gout 218 
356, 361 | Of leprosy 216 

Of wind 18, 141, 149, 234 | Of the ears 219, 229, 233 
Of the eyes 10, 66, 150, 156, | Of warts 220 
161, 184, 187, 234, 238 | Of partus 22] 

Of scab |». 157 | Of puelle prcudde 224 
Of worms 176, 219 ! Of blood, to stop 152, 225 
Of the nerves 179 | Of digestion 227 
Of trembling ib. | Of blows, falls 232 
Of paralysis 182 | Of hoarseness 248 
Of fleas 188 ! Of fistula 2950 


TABLE OF THE ADDITIONS. 


The articles marked with a star are in the original poem. : 


I. FROM VILLA NOVA'S 


line 


COMMENTARY. Relief to the eyes 48 
Sleep * 50 
line | Urination * ib. 
Cheese * 1| To drink often * 52 
Eggs * 2 | To walk after supper 53 
Garlic * 4 | Food for the poor 55 
The pike * 7 | Of the flux 56 
Rapes * 9 | Of wine * 58 
Fennel 10 | Of cheese * 60 
Spodium * 12 | Of things sweet, salt, etc. 67 
Salt * 14 | Of things boiled, fried, roast- 
Onions * 16| ed 74 
The bones * 18 | Of new bread, old wine, young 
'The humours * 19 meat, old fish ib. 
Óf the bones * 76 
IIl. FROM MANUSCRIPTS. 

Of animals. 
General and miscellaneous rules. The duck 79 
Ar 39 | The goose 82 
'Temperance * 40 | Pork * 84 
Not to eat or drink unneces- | Inwards of pigs * 85 
sarily 42 | Eggs * 92 
Light suppers * 45 | Cheese, eels, * 95 


TABLE OF THE ADDITIONS. 199 


line 

Leeks * 152 

Of plants. Bran, meal * 154 

line | Sage with rue * 156 

The bean * 98 | Pomegranate 158 
Colewort, vetches 100]| Acorns and chestnuts * — 160 
Bugloss 101| Herbs of spring, summer, 
Borrage 104| autumn, winter 161 
Parsnips 105 | Caraway 171 
Wormwood 110 | Malangia 173 
Southernwood 113 | The beet, blitus 175 
Scabious 114 | Parsley * 177 
Fennel 121 | The rose * 179 
The osier 126 | The lily 181 
Spinage 129 | Levistica 183 
Elder 131 | Sorsia 184 
Dill 133 | Lettuce 185 
Coriander 135 | The pine 18G 
Grapes * 136 | Liquorice 188 
The mulberry 138 | The nutmeg 192 
The fig * 139, 147 | Cummin 195 
Ginger 142 | The beet, cicla * Ton) 
Zedoary 146 | Epilogus, what parts of plants 
The sallow 149| to be taken 199 


THE END. 


PRINTED BY TALBOYS AND BROWNE, OXFORD: 











Y pr 
[ME 














EJ 


: : 
o 
E) 
APT 
E 
, 
] 
uH - 

E 

! 

D 


i. 


- 


xx 


TM 


E n 





Y 
' 
m. 


E 








, 
Ü 








c€-—. 
ne 
A 





mood 


wm 








y 
-- 
' 
D 








fr, 



















- ! N 
D 
- D 
. 
' 
D 
D 
D 
D 
* 
1 
* 
7c - 
B 
-or E 
] 
In 
D 
' 
m 
i 
v 

























- mo em — ups (e 9. m ipe s s m POS au. - rur em * —ÓÀ9 
pt" . : 3 rm , / A ja , s 

4: - i z d ) f PEE - 

L3 La p 

pom » 
B * » : 
2 ut » z 
*» " -: - zt ES 
idit » - E ] ; F - H * v ere Aurei LA p 

"f t. E ? wa " i ] D E Ts " | ! - pil e ars - f cH E. UD »" - E E PA es 3e yr: $ 





WORSE 


E uia a3 Kp e 


